<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>nav</title>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<nav epub:type="toc" role="doc-toc" aria-labelledby="toc">
<h1 id="toc">Contents</h1>
<ol>
<li><a href="01_halftitle.xhtml">halftitle</a></li>
<li><a href="02_frontmatter.xhtml">frontmatter</a></li>
<li><a href="03_title.xhtml">title</a></li>
<li><a href="04_copyright.xhtml">copyright.xhtml</a></li>
<li><a href="05_thefogwentthud.xhtml">thefogwentthud</a></li>
<li><a href="06_contents.xhtml">contents</a></li>
<li><a href="07_internationforensicscienceseries.xhtml">internationforensicscienceseries</a></li>
<li><a href="08_foreword.xhtml">foreword</a></li>
<li><a href="09_preface.xhtml">preface</a></li>
<li><a href="10_abouttheauthor.xhtml">abouttheauthor</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml">1 Introduction</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_1">General</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_2">What a Failure Investigator Does</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_3">The Conclusion Pyramid</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_4">Some Common Terms of the Art</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_5">Crime versus Failure</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_6">How Accidents and Failures Occur</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_7">Eyewitness Information</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_8">Exchange I</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_9">Exchange II</a></li></ol></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_10">Some Investigative Methods</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#sec1_11">Role in the Legal System</a></li>
</ol></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml">2 The Fundamental Method</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#sec2_1">The Fundamental Basis for Investigation</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#sec2_2">The Scientific Method</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#sec2_3">The Value of Falsification</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#sec2_4">Iteration: The Evolution of a Hypothesis</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#sec2_5">Lessons Learned</a></li></ol></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml">3 More about the Fundamental Method</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_1">More Historical Background</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_2">A Comparison of Deductive and Inductive Reasoning</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_3">Apriorism and Aposteriorism</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_4">Sophistry</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_5">The Method of Exhaustion</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_6">Coincidence, Correlation, and Causation</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_7">Applying the Scientific Method to Determine a Root Cause</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_8">The Scientific Method and the Legal System</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_9">Convergence of Independent Methods</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#sec3_10">Occam&#x2019;s Razor</a></li></ol></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml">4 Organizing Evidence</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_1">Data Collection and Efficient Sorting Schemes</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_2">Verification of Facts</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_3">Organization of Data and Evidence: Timelines</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_4">Cause-and-Effect Diagrams</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_5">A Place to Start</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_6">Event and Causal Factors Diagrams</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_7">Investigation Strategies</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_8">Scientific Method</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_9">Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_10"><i>Why</i> Staircase</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_11">Human Performance Evaluation Process (HPEP)</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_12">Change Analysis</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_13">Barrier Analysis</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_14">Motive, Means, and Opportunity (MMO)</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_15">Management Organizational Risk Tree (MORT)</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#sec4_16">Proprietary Investigation Methods</a></li></ol></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml">5 Four Common Reasons Why Some Investigations Fail</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#sec5_1">Introduction</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#sec5_2">Reason 1: The Tail Wagging the Dog</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#sec5_3">Reason 2: Lipstick on a Corpse</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#sec5_4">Reason 3: Elementary, My Dear Watson, Elementary</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#sec5_5">Reason 4: Dilution of the Solution</a></li></ol></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml">6 Report Writing: Three Case Studies</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#sec6_1">Reporting the Findings of an Investigation</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#sec6_2">Three Sample Reports</a></li></ol></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml">7 Misplaced Method in the Science of Murder</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_1">Introduction</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_2">The Scene</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_3">Further Search of the Premises</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_4">The State&#x2019;s Expert Reconstructs the Murder from the Clues</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_5">Revisiting the Scene Science: The Problem of Data</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_6">Testing to Develop Scientific Inferences from Data</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_7">Scientific Inferences from the Decedent&#x2019;s Sweater</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_8">Scientific Inferences from the Suspect&#x2019;s Glasses</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#sec7_9">Scientific Conclusions about the Shooting Events</a></li></ol></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml">8 Reading List</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#sec8_1">Books and Monographs</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#sec8_2">Papers and Articles</a></li></ol></li>
<li><a href="19_index.xhtml">index</a></li>
</ol>
</nav>

<nav epub:type="loi" aria-labelledby="ListofFig">
<h1 id="ListofFig">List of Figures</h1>
<ol>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#fig1_1">Figure 1.1 Investigation pyramid.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_1">Figure 4.1 Example: Scaled timeline with notes and durations.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_2">Figure 4.2 Initial cause-and-effect diagram</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_3">Figure 4.3 Cause-and-effect diagram: second level of possibilities.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_4">Figure 4.4 Cause-and-effect diagram: third level of possibilities.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_5">Figure 4.5 First-level cause-and-effect diagram for relief valve that unexpectedly lifted. RF, reactor feed water; RV, relief valve. RF-RV-28RV is simply the designation of a specific relief valve.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_6">Figure 4.6 Second-level cause-and-effect diagram for relief valve that lifted.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_7">Figure 4.7 Third-level cause-and-effect diagram for relief valve that lifted. FME, foreign material in the valve that caused problems.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_8">Figure 4.8 Fourth-level cause-and-effect diagram showing the administrative causative factors.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_9">Figure 4.9 Timeline emphasizing the difference between the expected service life and the actual time in service.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_10">Figure 4.10 DCE, design configuration evaluation; TCC, temporary configuration change.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_11">Figure 4.11 <i>Why</i> staircase example of a compressor failure.</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#fig4_12">Figure 4.12 Human performance evaluation process cause tree. (From NUREG/ CR&#x2013;6751, September 2001.)</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#tab4_2">Table 4.2 Example: Gantt Chart Investigation Plan Timeline</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#fig5_1">Figure 5.1 Cross-sectional view of a Zener diode that caused a failure in a nuclear station emergency diesel generator system.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_1">Figure 6.1 Fire-damaged area in multipurpose facility.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_2">Figure 6.2 Location of fire area and CVAN in the multipurpose facility.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_3">Figure 6.3 V fire pattern on CVAN. Metal frame of bin in foreground.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_4">Figure 6.4 Trash bin exemplar.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_5">Figure 6.5 Example of glass shard on top of the CVAN with dirt on its topside but clean underneath. This shard shadowed the area under it. The shard matches the type of glass used in the bulb&#x2019;s outer envelope.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_6">Figure 6.6 Relation of lamp to fire area.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_7">Figure 6.7 Broken bulb as observed in its fixture in the MPF ceiling.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_8">Figure 6.8 Damage around the economizer of unit 1.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_9">Figure 6.9 Overpressure damage to bag house.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_10">Figure 6.10 Failed CRD outboard bearing.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_11">Figure 6.11 Inner race.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_12">Figure 6.12 Cage of the bearing.</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#fig6_13">Figure 6.13 Outer race.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_1">Figure 7.1 and 7.2 Stains on the lower right quadrant of the garment show drip stains; the midline and the lower left quadrant show soaking and wicking stains.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_3">Figure 7.3 and 7.4 Stains on the right arm exhibit directionality as well as a smaller size characteristic of stains cast off from some moving blood source. The photo on the right shows the mixture of these stains&#x2013;the larger drips with some smaller cast-off stains.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_5">Figure 7.5 and 7.6 The overall views seen here at the left and right show evidence of the soaking and wicking stains as well as the holes in the sweater made by the slug and the sabot, which guided the slug through the 12-gauge shotgun&#x2019;s barrel. Recall that the shotgun itself was never recovered.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_7">Figure 7.7 and 7.8 These photomicrographs show backspattered blood droplets captured by the sweater&#x2019;s fibers. Sometimes these small blood drops can be mistaken for burned and unburned gunpowder. In this case a simple analytical test using x-ray fluorescence spectrophotometry will settle the issue: No nitrates and no other elements characteristic of gunpowder are present in the sample.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_9">Figure 7.9 and 7.10 The suspect&#x2019;s glasses appear on the left while the test glasses appear on the right. Both were examined with the microscope to analyze the bloodstains present on the lenses.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_11">Figure 7.11 and 7.12 The suspect&#x2019;s glasses are seen under magnification. The black line was introduced by the state&#x2019;s examiner&#x2013;the glasses are dirty and scratched; the stain in the center of the picture is the blood spot. Note how small the stain is&#x2013;smaller than the diameter of the lead in a modern mechanical pencil.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_13">Figure 7.13 and 7.14 This slide shows an interesting characteristic of blood. Notice the small white spot of blood&#x2013;it is 1.3 mm of blood. However, look closely behind it; you will see the original blood spot, which is 2.2 mm&#x2013;almost twice as big. As the big spot dried, it shrunk and left the smaller spot behind. The reason this happened is that the serum separates from the red cells and evaporates. The red cells then clump together and clot. The 1.3 mm spot is that clot of red cells. The photo on the bottom shows how small these stains are. (Remember my pencil lead example.) These are the smallest blood spots on the defendant&#x2019;s glasses.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_15">Figure 7.15 This is another example of the small size of the spots present on the glasses</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_16">Figure 7.16 Here are blood spots produced by shaking hands that were not first wiped off. Notice the size. Some are bigger and some are smaller. These spots were photographed 35 minutes after the bloody hands were shaken. The spots have not yet started to clot and shrink. It takes approximately 4 hours for them to clot and shrink, depending upon conditions.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_17">Figure 7.17 To get an accurate result I used test glasses that were also scratched and dirty. The spots were produced by shaking both bloody hands while squatting on the floor. Remember the size of the spots on the defendant&#x2019;s glasses. They ranged from 2.2 to .04 mm in size.</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#fig7_18">Figure 7.18 Test spots produced by shaking bloody hands.</a></li>
</ol>
</nav>
<nav epub:type="lot" aria-labelledby="ListofTab">
<h1 id="ListofTab">List of Tables</h1>
<ol>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#tab3_1">Table 3.1 Arson Arrests Compared to General Population by Race</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#tab4_1">Table 4.1 Example: Spreadsheet Event Timeline</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#tab4_2">Table 4.2 Example: Example: Gantt Chart Investigation Plan Timeline</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#tab4_3">Table 4.3 Failure Mode Probabilities of Centrifugal Pumps</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#tab4_4">Table 4.4 Evidence Hypothesis Table</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#tab4_5">Table 4.5 MMO Summary Table</a></li>
</ol>
</nav>
<nav epub:type="page-list" role="doc-pagelist" aria-labelledby="Page_List" hidden="">
<h1 id="Page_List">Page List</h1>
<ol>
<li><a href="01_halftitle.xhtml#page_i">i</a></li>
<li><a href="02_frontmatter.xhtml#page_ii">ii</a></li>
<li><a href="03_title.xhtml#page_iii">iii</a></li>
<li><a href="04_copyright.xhtml#page_iv">iv</a></li>
<li><a href="05_thefogwentthud.xhtml#page_v">v</a></li>
<li><a href="06_contents.xhtml#page_vi">vi</a></li>
<li><a href="06_contents.xhtml#page_vii">vii</a></li>
<li><a href="06_contents.xhtml#page_viii">viii</a></li>
<li><a href="06_contents.xhtml#page_ix">ix</a></li>
<li><a href="07_internationforensicscienceseries.xhtml#page_x">x</a></li>
<li><a href="07_internationforensicscienceseries.xhtml#page_xi">xi</a></li>
<li><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#page_xii">xii</a></li>
<li><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#page_xiii">xiii</a></li>
<li><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#page_xiv">xiv</a></li>
<li><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#page_xv">xv</a></li>
<li><a href="09_preface.xhtml#page_xvi">xvi</a></li>
<li><a href="09_preface.xhtml#page_xvii">xvii</a></li>
<li><a href="09_preface.xhtml#page_xviii">xviii</a></li>
<li><a href="10_abouttheauthor.xhtml#page_xix">xix</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_xx">xx</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_1">1</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_2">2</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_3">3</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_4">4</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_5">5</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_6">6</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_7">7</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_8">8</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_9">9</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_10">10</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_11">11</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_12">12</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_13">13</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_14">14</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_15">15</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_16">16</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_17">17</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_18">18</a></li>
<li><a href="11_chapter01.xhtml#page_19">19</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_20">20</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_21">21</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_22">22</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_23">23</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_24">24</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_25">25</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_26">26</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_27">27</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_28">28</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_29">29</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_30">30</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_31">31</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_32">32</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_33">33</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_34">34</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_35">35</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_36">36</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_37">37</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_38">38</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_39">39</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_40">40</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_41">41</a></li>
<li><a href="12_chapter02.xhtml#page_42">42</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_43">43</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_44">44</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_45">45</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_46">46</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_47">47</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_48">48</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_49">49</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_50">50</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_51">51</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_52">52</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_53">53</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_54">54</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_55">55</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_56">56</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_57">57</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_58">58</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_59">59</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_60">60</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_61">61</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_62">62</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_63">63</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_64">64</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_65">65</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_66">66</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_67">67</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_68">68</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_69">69</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_70">70</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_71">71</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_72">72</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_73">73</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_74">74</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_75">75</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_76">76</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_77">77</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_78">78</a></li>
<li><a href="13_chapter03.xhtml#page_79">79</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_80">80</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_81">81</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_82">82</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_83">83</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_84">84</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_85">85</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_86">86</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_87">87</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_88">88</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_89">89</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_90">90</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_91">91</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_92">92</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_93">93</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_94">94</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_95">95</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_96">96</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_97">97</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_98">98</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_99">99</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_100">100</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_101">101</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_102">102</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_103">103</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_104">104</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_105">105</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_106">106</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_107">107</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_108">108</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_109">109</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_110">110</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_111">111</a></li>
<li><a href="14_chapter04.xhtml#page_112">112</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#page_113">113</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#page_114">114</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#page_115">115</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#page_116">116</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#page_117">117</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#page_118">118</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#page_119">119</a></li>
<li><a href="15_chapter05.xhtml#page_120">120</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_121">121</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_122">122</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_123">123</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_124">124</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_125">125</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_126">126</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_127">127</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_128">128</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_129">129</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_130">130</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_131">131</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_132">132</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_133">133</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_134">134</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_135">135</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_136">136</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_137">137</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_138">138</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_139">139</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_140">140</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_141">141</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_142">142</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_143">143</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_144">144</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_145">145</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_146">146</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_147">147</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_148">148</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_149">149</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_150">150</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_151">151</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_152">152</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_153">153</a></li>
<li><a href="16_chapter06.xhtml#page_154">154</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_155">155</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_156">156</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_157">157</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_158">158</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_159">159</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_160">160</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_161">161</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_162">162</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_163">163</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_164">164</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_165">165</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_166">166</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_167">167</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_168">168</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_169">169</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_170">170</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_171">171</a></li>
<li><a href="17_chapter07.xhtml#page_172">172</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_173">173</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_174">174</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_175">175</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_176">176</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_177">177</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_178">178</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_179">179</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_180">180</a></li>
<li><a href="18_chapter08.xhtml#page_181">181</a></li>
<li><a href="19_index.xhtml#page_182">182</a></li>
<li><a href="19_index.xhtml#page_183">183</a></li>
</ol>
</nav>
<nav epub:type="landmarks" aria-labelledby="Guide">
<h1 id="Guide">Guide</h1>
<ol>
<li><a href="01_halftitle.xhtml" epub:type="halftitle">Half Title</a></li>
<li><a href="02_frontmatter.xhtml" epub:type="frontmatter">Frontmatter Page</a></li>
<li><a href="03_title.xhtml" epub:type="titlepage">Title Page</a></li>
<li><a href="04_copyright.xhtml" epub:type="copyrightpage">Copyright Page</a></li>
<li><a href="05_thefogwentthud.xhtml" epub:type="thefogwentthud">The Fog Went Thud</a></li>
<li><a href="06_contents.xhtml" epub:type="toc">Contents</a></li>
<li><a href="07_internationforensicscienceseries.xhtml" epub:type="international">International Forensic Science Series</a></li>
<li><a href="08_foreword.xhtml" epub:type="foreword">Foreword</a></li>
<li><a href="09_preface.xhtml" epub:type="preface">Preface</a></li>
<li><a href="10_abouttheauthor.xhtml" epub:type="author">About the Author</a></li>
<li><a href="19_index.xhtml" epub:type="index">Index</a></li>
</ol>
</nav>
</body>
</html>