<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>CopyRight</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<section epub:type="copyrightpage">
<h1 class="title" epub:type="fulltitle"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_iv" aria-label=" Page iv. "/></h1>
<p class="copyrighttop">Cover art courtesy of NASA.</p>
<p class="copyright1">CRC Press <span class="block"/>Taylor &amp; Francis Group <span class="block"/>6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300 <span class="block"/>Boca Raton, FL 33487&#x2013;2742</p>
<p class="copyright1">&#x00A9; 2009 by Taylor &amp; Francis Group, LLC <span class="block"/>CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor &amp; Francis Group, an Informa business</p>
<p class="copyright1">No claim to original U.S. Government works <span class="block"/>Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper <span class="block"/>10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1</p>
<p class="copyright1">International Standard Book Number-13: 978&#x2013;1-4200&#x2013;9280-6 (Hardcover)</p>
<p class="copyright1">This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.</p>
<p class="copyright1">Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.</p>
<p class="copyright1">For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978&#x2013;750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.</p>
<p class="copyright1"><b>Trademark Notice:</b>Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.</p>
<p class="copyrightb">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data</p>
<p class="copyright2">Noon, Randall.</p>
<p class="copyright3">Scientific method : applications in failure investigation and forensic science <span class="block"/>Randall K. Noon.</p>
<p class="copyright4">p. cm. -- (International forensic science and investigation series <span class="block"/>Includes bibliographical references and index.</p>
<p class="copyright5">ISBN 978&#x2013;1-4200&#x2013;9280-6 (hardcover : alk. paper)</p>
<p class="copyright6">1. Science--Methodology. 2. Reasoning. 3. Accident investigation. 4. Criminal <span class="block"/>investigation. 5. Forensic engineering. I. Title. II. Series.</p>
<p class="copyright7">Q175.32.R45N66 2009 <span class="block"/>620--dc22<span class="space1"/>2009006365</p>
<p class="copyright8">Visit the Taylor &amp; Francis Web site at <span class="block"/><a href="http://www.taylorandfrancis.com">http://www.taylorandfrancis.com</a></p>
<p class="copyright9">and the CRC Press Web site at <span class="block"/><a href="http://www.crcpress.com">http://www.crcpress.com</a></p>
</section>
</body>
</html>