<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>internatioforensicscienceseries</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<section epub:type="international" role="doc-toc">
<p class="topline"></p>
<h2 class="headingifss"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_x" aria-label=" Page x. "/><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_xi" aria-label=" Page xi. "/>International Forensic<span class="block1"/> Science Series</h2>
<p class="underline"></p>
<p class="noindent1">The modern forensic world is shrinking. Forensic colleagues are no longer just within a laboratory but across the world. E-mails come in from London, Ohio and London, England. Forensic journal articles are read in Peoria, Illinois and Pretoria, South Africa. Mass disasters bring forensic experts together from all over the world.</p>
<p class="indent1">The modern forensic world is expanding. Forensic scientists travel around the world to attend international meetings. Students graduate from forensic science educational programs in record numbers. Forensic literature&#x2014;  articles, books, and reports&#x2014;  grows in size, complexity, and depth.</p>
<p class="indent1">Forensic science is a unique mix of science, law, and management. It faces challenges like no other discipline. Legal decisions and new laws force forensic science to adapt methods, change protocols, and develop new sciences. The rigors of research and the vagaries of the nature of evidence create vexing problems with complex answers. Greater demand for forensic services pressures managers to do more with resources that are either inadequate or overwhelming. Forensic science is an exciting, multidisciplinary profession with a nearly unlimited set of challenges to be embraced. The profession is also global in scope&#x2014;  whether a forensic scientist works in Chicago or Shanghai, the same challenges are often encountered.</p>
<p class="indent1">The International Forensic Science Series is intended to embrace those challenges through innovative books that provide reference, learning, and methods. If forensic science is to stand next to biology chemistry physics, geology, and the other natural sciences, its practitioners must be able to articulate the fundamental principles and theories of forensic science and not simply follow procedural steps in manuals. Each book broadens forensic knowledge while deepening our understanding of the application of that knowledge. It is an honor to be the editor of the Taylor &amp; Francis International Forensic Science Series of books. I hope you find the series useful and informative.</p>
<p class="auth">Max M. Houck</p>
<p class="auth1">Series Editor</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>