<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Foreword</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<section epub:type="foreword" role="doc-toc">
<section class="topline"></section>
<h1 class="forwardheading"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_xii" aria-label=" Page xii. "/><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_xiii" aria-label=" Page xiii. "/>Foreword</h1>
<p class="underline"></p>
<p class="noindentfore">I have noted elsewhere that forensic science is a historical science,<a id="rref_1" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_1" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>1</sup></a> and the same has been said by others.<a id="rref_2" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_2" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>2</sup></a> That fact puts the practice of the profession at a certain disadvantage: A forensic scientist is always removed from events he is trying to reconstruct, and those events are themselves abstracted from the analysis the scientist conducts. Time moves in only one direction, sweeping with it many of the details one might otherwise need for a complete reconstruction.<a id="rref_3" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_3" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>3</sup></a> The details that are left behind, what Locard called &#x201C;traces&#x201D;<a id="rref_4" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_4" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>4</sup></a> and what I call &#x201C;proxy data,&#x201D;<a id="rref_5" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_5" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>5</sup></a> are necessarily incomplete, occasionally vague, and differentially valued.<a id="rref_6" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_6" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>6</sup></a> Nonetheless, these remnants are evidence in criminal cases. Forensic science attempts to connect these &#x201C;dots&#x201D; to reveal any relationships among people, places, and things that were involved in the criminal activity. This notionally suggests a reverse causality, that is, a piecing together of the remnants of the past activity to create a logical narrative that relates the events <i>in their purported original order</i> of more or less cause and effect. Again, the forensic scientist&#x2019; s abstractedness brackets what can and cannot be said about those past events.</p>
<p class="indentfore">The fact that one event regularly comes after another is often evidence that the prior caused the latter; throwing a stone at a window with sufficient force will cause the window to break. Other times, this is not the case&#x2014;  saying &#x201C;Open Sesame!&#x201D; before stepping through the grocery store&#x2019; s automatic door is not what causes it to open. As Fowler succinctly puts it:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="quote">Thus while we would agree that the throwing of the stone (the prior event) causes the latter event (the breaking of the window) in this particular situation, we would not say that, for instance, day <i>caused</i> night, although we do perceive a regular sequence of night following day. In other words, we do in real life make a distinction between something being <i>post hoc</i> (merely following a previous event) and <i>propter hoc</i> (being <i>caused</i> by the previous event).<a id="rref_7" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_7" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indentfore">We thus infer that a necessary connection exists between the stone and the window breaking and use the word <i>caused</i> to demonstrate that connection (&#x201D;Throwing the stone caused the window to break&#x201D;). The point that is often missed, however, is that the events that are chosen as &#x201C;cause&#x201D; and &#x201C;effect&#x201D; are really separate entities; there is no logical sufficiency to connect the two other than through our interpretation of the events. The law, or perhaps The Law, seeks direct one-to-one cause-and-effect results to clarify the <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_xiv" aria-label=" Page xiv. "/>trier of fact&#x2019; s decision. That is a legal necessity and not a scientific one. Hume indirectly made this distinction by stating that, for it to be successful, the scientific method must be based not on single cause-effect scenarios but on &#x201C;collections of frequently observed event sequences&#x201D; (Fowler <a href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_7" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>7</sup></a>, p. 62). Summary and analytical numerical indices deal with the collections Fowler notes. Given some population that is too large or too unwieldy to measure directly, samples and subsamples are collected and the aggregate data (Fowler&#x2019; s collections) are analyzed as indicators of the larger populations. Statistics and probability, therefore, are the basis for solid scientific interpretations.</p>
<p class="indentfore">Forensic science is only now elucidating its statistical basis for interpretations, with DNA being the first example. Interestingly, DNA may be the anomaly&#x2014;  and not the gold standard&#x2014;  of forensic science. Allele frequencies are really just class characteristics (more than one person can have the same allelic variant at a specific locus); their power comes from their independence, which allows the allele frequencies to be multiplied. Of course, <i>the forensic loci were chosen because they are independent.<a id="rref_8" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_8" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>8</sup></a></i> The rest of the forensic disciplines have not had this luxury and may not be afforded it; for example, how does one determine independence for features of a shoe tread intentionally designed for some end purpose like better traction for jogging? These areas of forensic analysis are only now wrestling with many fundamental and upsetting realizations, chief among them that the concept of individualization<a id="rref_9" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_9" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>9</sup></a> may be philosophically and existentially valid but scientifically bankrupt.<a id="rref_10" href="08_foreword.xhtml#ref_10" epub:type="biblioref" role="doc-biblioref"><sup>10</sup></a>Forensic science is now in the unenviable situation of playing catch-up with decades of practice to repair and renovate its philosophical foundations.</p>
<p class="indentfore">Noon&#x2019; s book is an excellent step in this process. Although it is oriented to forensic engineering, many of the ideas and principles apply to most if not all of forensic science. Well-written, concise, and illustrative, Noon has provided those of us with a notion of what the theory and philosophy of forensic science looks like with a wonderful stone with which to shore up the foundation of our discipline.</p>
<p class="auth">Max M. Houck</p>
<p class="auth1">West Virginia University</p>
<p class="ref1">References</p>
<ol class="orderedlistref">
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_1"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_1" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">1.</a><span class="spacef"/>Houck, M. M., and J. A. Siegel. 2006.<cite>Fundamentals of forensic science.</cite> San Diego: Academic Press.</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_2"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_2" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">2.</a><span class="spacef"/>Cleland, C. E. 2001. Historical science, experimental science, and the scientific method. <cite>Geology</cite> 29:987-90.</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_3"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_3" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">3.</a><span class="spacef"/>Davies, P. 2002. That mysterious flow. <cite>Scientific American</cite> 287:40-47.</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_4"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_4" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">4.</a><span class="spacef"/>Locard, E. 1939. <cite>Manual of police techniques</cite>, trans. Kathleen Brahney. 3rd ed. Paris: Payot.</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_5"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_5" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. "><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_xv" aria-label=" Page xv. "/>5.</a><span class="spacef"/>Houck, M. M. 2006. Playing fast and loose with time and space: Statistics and forensic science. Paper presented at the Joint Statistical Meetings, Seattle.</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_6"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_6" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">6.</a><span class="spacef"/>Houck, M. M. 2006. Foreword&#x2014;The grammar of forensic science.<cite> Forensic Science Review</cite> 18(2).</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_7"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_7" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">7.</a><span class="spacef"/>Fowler, W. S. 1962. <cite>The development of the scientific method.</cite> London: Pergammon Press, p. 62.</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_8"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_8" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">8.</a><span class="spacef"/>Jobling, M. A., and P. Gill. 2004. Encoded evidence: DNA in forensic analysis. <cite>Nature</cite> 5:739-52.</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_9"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_9" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">9.</a><span class="spacef"/>Kirk, P. 1963. Criminalistics. <cite>Science</cite> 140:367-70.</li>
<li epub:type="biblioentry" class="ref" id="ref_10"><a href="08_foreword.xhtml#rref_10" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. ">10.</a><span class="spacef"/>Saks, M. J., and J. J. Koehler. 2008. The individualization fallacy in forensic science evidence. <cite>Vanderbilt Law Review</cite> 61:199-219.</li>
</ol>
</section>
</body>
</html>