<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Preface</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<section epub:type="preface" role="doc-toc">
<section class="topline"></section>
<h1 class="prefaceheading"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_xvi" aria-label=" Page xvi. "/><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_xvii" aria-label=" Page xvii. "/>preface</h1>
<section class="underline"></section>
<p class="noindentpre">The photograph of the Space Shuttle <i>Challenger</i> on the cover, which was taken 13 seconds after lift-off, is a blunt reminder about why it is necessary to investigate failures, accidents, and crimes. Seven remarkable people died when the <i>Challenger</i> exploded just after launch. Seven families were grievously affected. Friends, neighbors, workmates, communities, and a nation mourned. National treasure was wasted. The time invested by thousands of people was wasted. The reputation of a nation, an agency, and a program was severely damaged. It was a very hard loss to bear.</p>
<p class="indentpre">To avoid such tragic losses of life, property, reputation, and treasure, we search for the reasons why these events occur. Not only is it expedient to do so, for many reasons, but it also satisfies a psychological requirement for closure. For those who are directly affected by such losses, it is difficult not to ask: Why did this happen?</p>
<p class="indentpre">Thus, we take the information we learn from an investigation and use it to devise ways, hopefully, to avert similar tragedies. If we ruthlessly apply logic and proven scientific principles in our investigation, we may be successful. If we allow biases to affect our logic and make mistakes understanding the evidence, we will likely fail.</p>
<p class="indentpre">The Space Shuttle <i>Challenger</i> is an example of this. The postaccident investigation and the follow-up implementation of corrective actions were done with great effort, expense, and determination by many dedicated people. However, the effort was flawed.</p>
<p class="indentpre">On February 1, 2003, another shuttle tragedy replayed itself across the television screens of the world. After a successful mission in space, the Space Shuttle <i>Columbia</i> reentered the atmosphere. During reentry, a hole burned through the port-side wing, where a heat-resistant tile had been damaged during lift-off. The space ship broke apart and another seven of our brightest and best died.</p>
<p class="indentpre">This book contains six subject chapters, a seventh case study chapter contributed by Jon J. Nordby, PhD, D-ABMDI, and an eighth chapter that is a short reading list for those who wish to read more about this book&#x2019; s subject. I have attempted to provide theory, historical context, and practical experience. I have deliberately not used a formal academic format. In writing the manuscript, I imagined that I was talking about the various topics to a good <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_xviii" aria-label=" Page xviii. "/>friend over a cup of coffee. In some cases, that is exactly how the topic first came to mind.</p>
<p class="indentpre">The best way to become proficient at almost anything is to do it often: practice, practice, practice. This is also true with failure, accident, and crime investigations. Studying the available literature, however, does reduce the amount of time necessary to become proficient. It also allows a person the opportunity to avoid the mistakes already made by others&#x2014;  and perhaps pioneer new ones.</p>
<p class="indentpre">To those considering working in this field, I recommend that the short reading list in the last chapter be considered. Take advantage of the free Internet downloads I have listed. If there is a good library nearby, request and read at least some of the books, monographs, and articles. I also suggest that a person work at least for a time with an experienced investigator in a mentor-pupil relationship. I subscribe to the &#x201C;work in the store before you try to run one&#x201D; philosophy. While there may exist better methods of learning, I don&#x2019; t know what they are. Besides, there are many little tricks of the trade, especially in dealing with administrative matters and people that are peculiar to each region and organization, which cannot easily be incorporated into a book intended for general readership.</p>
<p class="indentpre">Applying a method is not a substitute for basic subject matter knowledge, evidence, or facts. If there were a heart transplant failure case that needed to be investigated, I don&#x2019; t think a group of bricklayers would do as good a job in figuring out the issues as would a group of doctors and surgeons. Conversely, in a controversy involving masonry workmanship, I believe that a group of bricklayers would do a better job than a team of doctors and surgeons. Methodology is simply a framework within which subject matter knowledge, evidence, and facts are organized and assessed.</p>
<p class="indentpre">Lastly, I am indebted to Dr. Jon Nordby for providing an excellent case study. It not only ably demonstrates principles discussed in the rest of the book, but also is a good true-life detective story in its own right.</p>
<p class="indentpre">With those thoughts in mind, I hope the reader enjoys and benefits from the materials presented. I trust that one of you will improve upon my humble effort. I look forward to reading it, or perhaps you can tell me about it over a cup of coffee sometime.</p>
<p class="prefacebottom">RN</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>