<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>chapter 2:The Fundamental Method</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="toc" role="doc-toc">
<header>
<p class="topline"></p>
<h1 class="chaptername01"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_20" aria-label=" Page 20. "/><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_21" aria-label=" Page 21. "/>The Fundamental<span class="block"/>Method</h1>
<p class="number02">2</p>
<p class="underline"></p>
<p class="doi">DOI:10-9781420095806-2</p>
<p class="intro">The human mind is prone to suppose the existence of more order and regularity in the world than it finds.</p>
<p class="intro1">Sir Francis Bacon, 1620</p>
</header>
<section aria-labelledby="sec2_1">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec2_1">The Fundamental Basis for Investigation</h2>
<p class="noindent">The fundamental basis for failure investigations is the scientific method.</p>
<p class="indent">As noted in the standard concerning the investigation of a fire or explosion published by both the American National Standards Institute and the Nation Fire Protection Association, ANSI/NFPA 921, Chapter 2, 1992 edition:</p>

<blockquote>
<p class="quote">A fire or explosion investigation is a complex endeavor involving both art and science. The compilation of factual data, as well as an analysis of those facts, should be accomplished objectively and truthfully. The basic methodology of the fire investigation should rely upon the use of a systematic approach and attention to all relevant details. The use of a systematic approach often will uncover new factual data for analysis, which may require previous conclusions to be re-evaluated.</p>
<p class="quote1">The systematic approach recommended is that of the scientific method, which is used in the physical sciences. This method provides for the organizational and analytical process so desirable and necessary in a successful fire investigation.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indenteg1">Likewise, the <i>Guidelines for Failure Investigation,</i> published by the Task Committee on Guidelines for Failure Investigation of the American Society of Civil Engineers in 1989, recommends utilization of the scientific method, which is described on p. 62, Section 2.12:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="quote">The process of developing failure hypotheses varies with the complexity of the failure situation. During an investigation of a minor nature the forensic engineer might develop failure hypotheses working alone. However, during the investigation of a large-scale failure requiring a team of investigators, the development of failure hypotheses should involve discussions and conferences during several phases of the investigation plan. Thus, the development of a final failure hypothesis should be an evolutionary process with input from the entire investigative team.</p>
<p class="quote1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_22" aria-label=" Page 22. "/>Often after the initial site visit, a failure hypothesis may be suggested; then as data is collected and analyzed, the initial hypothesis may be proven, abandoned, or revised, based on the synthesis of investigative data. If the initial hypothesis is abandoned and a new hypothesis is generated, then additional site investigation, document review, and synthesis of the analysis process may be required until a final hypothesis is established.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indent">The above is true not only for fire, explosion, and civil engineering failure investigations, but also for the investigation of other types of failures, crimes, and significant events whose causes need to be determined. Other nationally recognized investigative codes and standards have similar statements that endorse, and in some cases require, the use of the scientific method.</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec2_2">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec2_2">The Scientific Method</h2>
<p class="noindent">There are historically two versions of the basic scientific method. The first and older version involves collecting verifiable facts and observations about an effect, event, item, or subject. A person then assesses these facts and observations and posits a general proposition consistent with the data. As new facts and observations accumulate, the general proposition may be modified or changed to maintain consistency with the known body of verifiable information.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, suppose data concerning the wingspan, weight, and flying ability of various bird species were collected and correlated. Based upon these correlations, generalizations about the ratio of wingspan to weight that is necessary to successfully achieve long-distance flight, medium-distance flight, or short-distance flight, or perhaps not being able to fly at all, might be concluded.</p>
<p class="indent">This was the basic method, which is sometimes called empiricism, advocated by Lord Francis Bacon who lived in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. Lord Bacon, by the way, is not to be confused with Friar Roger Bacon, who also had a hand in developing the scientific method several centuries before Lord Francis Bacon. The role each played in developing the scientific method will be noted in the next chapter.</p>
<p class="indent">Fundamentally, empiricism is the tenet that knowledge is derived from measurements, verifiable facts, observations, and actual, as opposed to spiritual or supernatural, experiences, feelings, or beliefs. Furthermore, as they are collected, these measurements, verifiable facts, observations, and experiences are to be reported and documented without being modified or interpreted by preconceived notions.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, if the ignition temperature of a certain kind of paper is reported in reference books to be 451&#x00B0;F, this fact can be verified by anyone, in any laboratory, by recreating the same conditions as specified in the reference <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_23" aria-label=" Page 23. "/>and measuring the temperature when ignition occurs. This is an example of what is meant by the terms <i>repeatable</i> and <i>verifiable.</i></p>
<p class="indent">If an investigator, however, finds that three samples of the same kind of paper listed in the reference book ignite variously at 454&#x00B0;F, 450&#x00B0;F, and 447&#x00B0;F, after ensuring that the specified conditions have been faithfully recreated and this is not due to instrumentation variances, then these are the ignition temperatures that should be reported.</p>
<p class="indent">If our dauntless investigator, however, has a preconceived notion that the correct answer must be 451&#x00B0;F, since this is the value listed in the reference book, then the investigator might be tempted to report that he found that the ignition point was indeed 451&#x00B0;F, and to ignore the small differences he actually observed. The investigator might presume that he must have done something slightly wrong to have missed, but come close to, the correct answer. After all, 454&#x00B0;F, 450&#x00B0;F, and 447&#x00B0;F are all close to 451&#x00B0;F, and taken together, the three values do have an average of 451&#x00B0;F.</p>
<p class="indent">The outcome of this is that the investigator nudges the data to fit his preconceived notion of what he expected to find. This is called a confirmation bias. In doing so, he fails to report what was plainly in front of his eyes: that the kind of paper he tested has small but measurable variations in ignition temperature from that reported in the reference book.</p>
<p class="indent">This variation in ignition temperature may become important to the investigation in ways the investigator cannot imagine at this point. Unfortunately, in his eagerness to confirm the presumed correct value listed in the reference book and not appear wrong, the investigator perhaps threw away a very useful nugget of knowledge and compromised sound laboratory practice. A good rule for field or laboratory work is to report what is actually observed, not what a person thinks should be observed or what he has concluded he has observed.</p>
<p class="indent">In this regard, consider the following story researched and reported by Lisa Jardine in the April 28, 2006, online BBC News. In 1664, sea trials were done by the British Navy to test the use of pendulum clocks to determine longitude. The clocks were taken on a 9-month voyage southward down the west coast of Africa. Upon their return to London in 1665, the captain of the expedition, Captain Robert Holmes, reported that the clocks had worked so well, they had actually saved the lives of the crews of the four ships.</p>
<p class="indent">What was reported by Captain Holmes was this: On the return journey, Captain Holmes and the expedition had to sail several hundred miles westward in order to catch a favorable wind. In doing so, all four ships had run low on drinking water&#x2014;so low, in fact, that they thought they were in danger of running out of water. According to their traditional calculations, the expedition was far from any freshwater supply point.</p>
<p class="indent">Captain Holmes, however, reported that according to the pendulum clocks they were only a short distance west of Fuego, an island in the Cape <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_24" aria-label=" Page 24. "/>Verde group. The expedition sailed due east accordingly and made landfall at Fuego the next day, as predicted. When news reached London about the success of the pendulum clocks in accurately determining longitude, the story was heralded about how well the clocks had worked. The Fellows of the Royal Society were impressed, and orders for the new clocks came in.</p>
<p class="indent">However, the inventor of the clock, Christiaan Huygens, had doubts about this claim. He did not believe that his own invention could be so accurate. In fact, Mr. Huygens doubted that the captain honestly reported the event. Ms. Jardine reports that Mr. Huygens said the following in a letter to the Royal Society:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="quote">I have to confess that I had not expected such a spectacular result from these clocks. I beg you to tell me if the said Captain seems a sincere man whom one can absolutely trust. For it must be said that I am amazed that the clocks were sufficiently accurate to allow him by their means to locate such a tiny island.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indent">Consequently, the Royal Society asked Mr. Samuel Pepys to check the evidence supporting the claim, especially the ship log of Captain Holmes. Pepys&#x2019;s scrutiny of the matter found cause for Mr. Huygens&#x2019;s doubts. The pendulum clocks had not been any more accurate than the traditional calculations by the other captains in the expedition. The sailors had simply been lucky. Captain Holmes falsified the evidence in order to please the fellows at the Royal Society. In other words, Captain Holmes told them what they wanted to hear and what the evidence appeared to support.</p>
<p class="indent">It is commendable that Mr. Huygens was scrupulously logical. Even though he had invented them, he knew that his pendulum clocks could not be as accurate as was being claimed. In fact, Mr. Huygens&#x2019;s pendulum type ship clocks never were particularly valuable in accurately determining longitude. An effective ship&#x2019;s clock to determine longitude was not invented until a hundred years later, in the mid-1700s, by John Harrison. Thus, the moral of this story is that even when faced with agreeable evidence, it is important to have a questioning attitude. How many sailors might have died by fatal navigation errors if the clocks had been presumed to be accurate?</p>
<p class="indent">Empiricism is contrasted by rationalism. Rationalism is the tenet that knowledge can be derived from the power of intellect alone. In other words, knowledge can be derived by deductive reasoning from basic principles that people sometimes take for granted without physical proof or justifying evidence.</p>
<p class="indent">Sometimes these basic principles are said to be self-evident; that is, they are considered to be so obvious that no proof is required. Alternately, they are described as being self-evident because the principles are so fundamental, their proof would constitute a tautology; that is, they can only be proven by referring to themselves. Notions about beauty, symmetry, religion, ideology, truth, good and evil, and philosophy are often used to justify self-evident principles.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_25" aria-label=" Page 25. "/>On a practical level, most notions about beauty, symmetry, and so on do appear to change with time and vary from culture to culture. Despite protestations to the contrary from &#x201C;true believers,&#x201D; notions about truth, right and wrong, beauty, symmetry, and so on are not held absolute even within the same culture. In literate cultures, the evolution of principles held to be absolute is well documented in the historical record. In other cultures, it is indirectly documented through their art, mythology, and traditions.</p>
<p class="indent">After 2,000 years of acceptance, for example, the self-evident principles of geometry put forward by Euclid were eventually challenged by nineteenth- century mathematicians as not really being self-evident. The result was non-Euclidean geometry, which was later used to describe the time-space relationships embedded in relativity. Euclid&#x2019;s geometry was simply one kind of geometry among many.</p>
<p class="indent">Unlike empiricism, rationalism allows preconceived notions to provide a framework into which new facts and data are fitted. Some fundamental principle is usually considered inviolate; that is, the principle can&#x2019;t be changed or modified because it is assumed to be absolutely true. Consequently, in order for the fundamental principle to remain inviolate, all data, facts, and observations must be made to be consistent with the fundamental principle.</p>
<p class="indent">Data that appear to contradict the assumed fundamental principle have to be discredited or must be explained away by the invention of new rules. Sometimes the new rules apply only to that particular fact or group of facts. In the preceding example involving the ignition temperature of paper, the investigator did just that: He discredited his own experimental data when it did not agree with the value he expected. He presumed he had made some small mistake that caused the variation and then nudged the figures to make his laboratory results agree with the value listed in the reference book.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the following simple example about disease to highlight the difference between empiricism and rationalism. Empiricists might note the statistical distribution of a disease, the various age groups it affects and their occupations, when it occurs, where it occurs, and so on. In this way perhaps a useful correlation about the disease may be learned that allows the disease to be avoided, prevented, predicted, or perhaps cured. This was how, for example, the connection between yellow fever and mosquitoes was made.</p>
<p class="indent">Rationalists, on the other hand, might propose as a fundamental principle that disease is a malady sent by God to punish people for wrongdoing. Consequently, even if it appears that good people are being stricken by disease, which would contradict the basic principle if taken at face value, rationalists might conclude that disease is striking down otherwise good people because they have done bad things in secret and only God knows their secrets. Disease, therefore, provides an excellent way for mortals to distinguish between people who are guilty of sins committed in secret and people who are genuinely good.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_26" aria-label=" Page 26. "/>Thus, the observation that seemingly good people are also struck down by the disease is explained away by the invention of a special rule. Note that the new rule, like the fundamental principle, does not lend itself to being either proven or disproven. It is a matter of faith, not evidence. Further, because God is presumed to be the controlling factor with respect to disease, some people might conclude that there is little point in attempting to do anything to understand or avoid disease. Mere mortals should not interfere with God&#x2019;s will.</p>
<p class="indent">This was the basic premise of the famous, or more honestly the infamous, published sermon of Reverend Edward Massey in 1772, <i>The Dangerous and Sinful Practice of Inoculation.</i> As a result of opposition to inoculation against smallpox by various religious leaders, thousands in Europe and in the American colonies died who could have otherwise been saved from the scourge. Further, despite the reported successes of the Jenner method of vaccination, which removed the risks associated with the live inoculation method, in 1798 various clergymen in Boston formed the Anti-Vaccination Society. This society called upon people to refuse vaccination because it was &#x201C;bidding defiance to Heaven itself, even to the will of God,&#x201D; and that &#x201C;the law of God prohibits the practice.&#x201D; Jenner was still being regularly vilified from the pulpit at the University of Cambridge in 1803.</p>
<p class="indent">Lest some think that the preceding notion about disease is absurd or just an academic discussion of a belief no longer harbored by modern civilization, please scan the Internet under topics such as <i>disease and punishment or disease as punishment by God</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">In short, empiricists accept what is observed at face value and try to find order to explain it. Rationalists, on the other hand, propose up front what the order should be and then sort their observations and facts to fit within that framework. More will be said about this later when <i>a priori</i> and <i>a posteriori </i>reasoning are discussed.</p>
<p class="indent">The second and more modern version of the basic scientific method also involves collecting data about a particular effect and looking for a principle common to the observations. After developing a working hypothesis consistent with the available data, however, the hypothesis is then applied to anticipate additional consequences or effects that have not yet been observed. In short, the hypothesis is tested to determine if it has predictive value.</p>
<p class="indent">These additional consequences or effects are then sought out: perhaps by experimentation, perhaps by additional observations, or perhaps by reexamining evidence and data already collected. Often, a good working hypothesis allows a person to predict the presence of evidence or effects that were present from the beginning but were overlooked, misunderstood, or considered unimportant during the initial evidence gathering period.</p>
<p class="indent">If the additional consequences or effects predicted by the hypothesis are confirmed, this does not automatically verify the hypothesis, however. It is <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_27" aria-label=" Page 27. "/>only a tentative confirmation of the hypothesis. When a prediction and its subsequent verification apparently support the hypothesis, do not contradict it, and demonstrate that the hypothesis has useful predictive ability, it still doesn&#x2019;t conclusively prove the hypothesis.</p>
<p class="indent">Verification of a hypothesis occurs when observations, or experiments and data that could show the hypothesis to be false fail to do so. This is the principle of falsification. Thus, there must be not only verifiable evidence that supports a hypothesis, but also no verifiable evidence that falsifies the hypothesis.</p>
<p class="indent">The last point is important and is often the most forgotten or neglected step in the scientific method. A reasonable and unbiased effort must be expended to discredit the hypothesis. Verifiable evidence that appears to falsify a hypothesis should not be overlooked, neglected, or dismissed. If a hypothesis truthfully and faithfully explains the phenomenon or event that occurred, it will stand against tough, critical scrutiny. Conclusions based upon inductive reasoning alone may be flawed unless they are well tested by falsification.</p>
<p class="indent">In sum, the attributes of a good working hypothesis are:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">All the data upon which it is based needs to be factually verifiable.</li>
<li class="dotch01">It must be consistent with all the relevant verifiable data, not just selected data.</li>
<li class="dotch01">The scientific principles upon which the hypothesis relies must be verifiable and repeatable.</li>
<li class="dotch01">The hypothesis should provide some predictive value.</li>
<li class="dotch01">The hypothesis must be subjected to and withstand genuine falsification efforts.</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec2_3">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec2_3">The Value of Falsification</h2>
<p class="noindent">Consider the hypothesis that the earth is flat. After making hundreds of personal casual observations from his personal vantage point unaided by any instrumentation, an investigator concludes that the earth is flat. Certainly people living in south-central Illinois, the Pampas in Argentina, the Sahara Desert, or the Panhandle of Texas might easily concur that the earth looks flat to them, too, as they go about their daily routine.</p>
<p class="indent">At the beach, the investigator further observes that the horizon dividing the earth from the sky appears to be a straight line, which he concludes also supports his flat earth hypothesis. A search of historical records by the investigator also finds ample precedent that famous and important people from times past also believed that the earth is flat. (This is called validation by appeal to authority.)</p>
<p class="indent">Based upon the flat earth hypothesis, the investigator predicts that the Outback of Australia will appear flat and that the Mongolian Desert will also <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_28" aria-label=" Page 28. "/>appear flat. After traveling there, by surface travel, of course, these predictions appear to be born out: both places look flat to the investigator. In fact, everywhere the investigator looks with his unaided eyes, the earth appears flat. Eventually, the investigator collects an overwhelming pile of anecdotal evidence that seemingly proves that the earth is flat.</p>
<p class="indent">But, of course, the earth is not flat. It only appears flat when observed in sufficiently small pieces with unaided eyes. A single, panoramic observation from space or a single circumferential navigation of the earth, as was done by Magellan, supersedes any mountain of accumulated anecdotal evidence that supports the flat earth hypothesis. Thus, it is not the quantity of evidence that supports a hypothesis that counts, or the perceived authority of people who agree with the hypothesis that counts. What counts is the quality of the facts that falsify a hypothesis, or perhaps fail to falsify a hypothesis.</p>
<p class="indent">When a person tends to notice only evidence that supports a certain hypothesis and undervalues, dismisses, or doesn&#x2019;t even bother to look for contradictory evidence, this is a confirmation bias. Gamblers are famous for doing this. Gamblers tend to remember best the times when they win and tend to forget or minimize the memories of the times when they lose. Surveys of typical gamblers leaving casinos show that most believe they have won more than they have lost, or at least that they have nearly broken even, when the facts plainly indicate that more people lose money in casinos than win money.</p>
<p class="indent">Investigators sometimes become caught up in confirmation bias traps of their own making. They may set up laboratory tests, recreations of the event, or conduct other sorts of tests whose outcomes are framed to support a certain hypothesis. Concomitantly, they may avoid dealing with data or outcomes that might contradict the hypothesis in question. This is especially true when much investigative time and energy has already been invested in a certain hypothesis, and deadlines and budgets predispose the investigator against initiating a major new line of inquiry.</p>
<p class="indent">The Michelson-Morley experiment, wherein the presence of cosmic aether was not detected, is a famous example of how falsification works. For many years, prominent scientists had proposed the presence of a cosmic substance, aether, which supposedly permeated the universe. Aether existed, they argued, to explain how light is transmitted from the sun to the earth or from the stars to the earth. Since these scientists assumed that light propagated as a wave, like sound in air or a vibration though solid material, they concluded there must be some type of substance permeating space that provides a medium for the transmission of light. The aether existed, they argued, because there was just no other way to account for the transmission of light through empty space.</p>
<p class="indent">By the way, the expression &#x201C;there is just no other way&#x201D; and similar expressions, such as &#x201C;it can&#x2019;t be anything else,&#x201D; &#x201C;it is impossible for anyone else but&#x2026;,&#x201D; and &#x201C;by elimination it must be &#x2026;,&#x201D; are indications that a <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_29" aria-label=" Page 29. "/>thinly disguised argument by exhaustion is being employed. Be wary of such arguments. While it is certainly a <i>bona fide</i> logical method when employed properly, it is also one of the most abused logical methods and is a great argumentation refuge for charlatans and pseudointellectual rogues. Almost anything can be and has been proven by this method when the underlying assumptions are not made plain and carefully examined. The key is understanding the basis and limitations of the exhaustive list from which items have been eliminated until only one possibility remains.</p>
<p class="indent">Consequently, if light propagates through the cosmic aether like sound waves traveling through air or water, light should be measurably faster in the direction of travel and should be measurably slower in a direction perpendicular to or opposite to that of travel. This concept is analogous to sound emitted by a person riding a bus.</p>
<p class="indent">When a person riding a bus makes a sound that emanates equally in all directions, another person standing still on the ground and in front of the bus will measure the sound to be slightly faster in the direction of travel of the bus.</p>
<p class="eqch2">Sound velocity + bus velocity = slightly faster sound velocity</p>
<p class="indent">Likewise, the nonmoving observer will note that sound heard when the observer is standing perpendicular to the direction of travel of the bus will be unaffected by the motion of the bus.</p>
<p class="eqch2">Sound velocity + 0 = same sound velocity</p>
<p class="indent">The sound velocity measured by the observer standing behind the bus is then slightly slower in the direction opposite the travel of the bus.</p>
<p class="eqch2">Sound velocity - bus velocity = slightly slower sound velocity</p>
<p class="indent">Based upon these arguments, Michelson and Morley in 1887 attempted to measure the speed of the earth relative to the aether. Presuming that the aether theory was true, it should be possible to measure the speed of the earth through the aether by comparing the length a beam of light travels in a certain period of time in the direction of travel of the earth to a similar beam in the same amount of time directed perpendicular to the earth&#x2019;s direction, or directed in the opposite direction of travel. A comparison of the lengths of the two light beams, and the application of a little algebra, would then allow the speed of the earth relative to the aether to be determined.</p>
<p class="indent">Using a sensitive interferometer, a device that compares one length of light against another, the two experimenters found that light traveled at the same speed in the direction that the earth was traveling as it did either in a <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_30" aria-label=" Page 30. "/>direction perpendicular to the motion of the earth or in the opposite direction to the earth&#x2019;s motion. In fact, despite the fact that they knew the earth was moving around the sun with respect to the solar system at 66,700 mph, they found that light had measurably the same speed no matter which direction from earth they looked. In short, to them the speed of light appeared constant in all directions despite the obvious motion of the earth.</p>
<p class="indent">Initially, Michelson and Morley thought they had done something wrong. Consequently, they repeated their experiment many times and thoroughly checked their equipment. After exhaustively ensuring that the fault was neither the method nor the equipment, they published their results.</p>
<p class="indent">The null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment eventually led to the development of the theory of relativity by Albert Einstein. Some years later, physicists discovered that they could account for the transmission of light through empty space without a transmission medium that permeated all of space. Their previously held assumption that there was simply no other way to account for the transmission of light through space was wrong because their list of possibilities was not truly exhaustive. They had omitted something that they didn&#x2019;t know at the time: Electromagnetic waves, including light, can propagate through a vacuum due to the self-propagating nature of alternating electric and magnetic fields. For this work Michelson was the first U.S. citizen awarded the Nobel Prize for physics.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider how the principle of falsification made a difference to death row inmates in Illinois. On January 31, 2000, Governor George Ryan announced a moratorium on executions because Illinois had recently exonerated more death row inmates than it had executed.</p>
<p class="indent">Since executions had resumed in 1977 in Illinois, thirteen inmates had been exonerated while twelve had been executed. A fourteen-member commission was charged to investigate how thirteen innocent persons were waiting to be executed despite safeguards in the legal system to prevent false capital crime convictions. Governor Ryan stated, &#x201C;Until I can be sure with moral certainly that no innocent man or woman is facing lethal injection, no one will meet that fate.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">What had happened? When the thirteen people in question had been tried for capital offenses, DNA testing was not available. With the available evidence at the time of trial, some of which even included blood typing and eyewitness testimony, these thirteen persons were convicted and sentenced to death by juries of their peers. The evidence presented at the time of trial was apparently persuasive and left no doubt in the jurors&#x2019; minds. These cases were then reviewed and appealed according to the standard legal procedures in Illinois to ensure that the trials were fair and impartial. Despite these safeguards, however, these thirteen people were waiting their turn to die.</p>
<p class="indent">Fortunately, when DNA testing became available for routine forensic work, some of the stored evidence in these thirteen cases still had usable<span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_31" aria-label=" Page 31. "/> bloodstains, semen, or other genetic material from the culprit that could be tested and compared with that of the person convicted of the crime. DNA testing, when properly done, is verifiable and repeatable.</p>
<p class="indent">In these thirteen cases the results of DNA testing excluded the person convicted of the crime from being the culprit. In other words, the DNA tests falsified the evidence previously provided to the court that supported a guilty verdict.</p>
<p class="indent">Similar events have unfolded in nearly all U.S. states since about 2000, when DNA testing began to be used to aggressively check previous guilty verdicts that were primarily based on traditional eyewitness identification testimony and circumstantial evidence. Since 2001, for example, the Dallas, Texas, courts have had to release sixteen people (as of May 26, 2008) who had been previously found guilty of a capital or similar serious felony-level offense. One person had spent 27 years in prison for a crime he did not commit; another had been in prison for 23 years.</p>
<p class="indent">In addition to the sixteen overturned convictions, another twenty-four people were released from Dallas, Texas, jails and prisons who were wholly exonerated as part of a &#x201C;fake drug&#x201D; scandal in 2001. In that scandal, Dallas Police Department narcotics officers provided false statements in court that affirmed positive field testing of materials for narcotics or similar illegal drugs. The actual evidence against these people, however, did not stand up to a stringent application of the falsification principle, fact verification, and the scandal was uncovered. Unfortunately, the scandal was not uncovered until many innocent people had spent time in jail or prison.</p>
<p class="indent">Like DNA testing, fingerprinting, i.e., dactyloscopy, is another tool that is presumably verifiable and repeatable that can provide falsification. The correspondence between individuals and their fingerprint patterns was recognized even in ancient times. Fingerprint impressions were used by the Babylonians and Egyptians as personal identification markers. In the nineteenth century, fingerprints were systematically studied and classified. Jean Vucetich developed the first fingerprint classification system for criminal work in 1888 in Argentina. The modern fingerprinting system was then developed by Sir Edward Richard Henry in the United Kingdom in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and was put to practical use there in 1901. This same system was then applied in the United States in 1903.</p>
<p class="indent">Unless a person has a detachable finger that he occasionally loans to others, or a transfer of a fingerprint impression has otherwise occurred, the finding of a person&#x2019;s fingerprint can physically confirm that his corresponding finger contacted the object on which the fingerprint has been found. Consequently, the act of touching need not be seen by eyewitnesses to be confirmed. The fingerprint itself documents the contact. This is, of course, a very powerful investigative tool.</p>
<p class="indent">However, fingerprint identification mistakes, as well as DNA test mistakes, due to poor training, poor technique, ambiguous or inadequate <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_32" aria-label=" Page 32. "/>procedures, or simple malfeasance, certainly occur. Consequently, the reliability of fingerprint evidence has been called into question.</p>
<p class="indent">In 1995, a fingerprint proficiency test was conducted by the Collaborative Testing Service to determine how well fingerprint examiners correctly match fingerprints to the correct individuals. The test was designed by the International Association for Identification, a professional fingerprinting organization. The test was as follows. Four fingerprint cards with all ten fingerprints were given along with seven latent prints. Of the 156 fingerprint examiners who participated in the test, only 44% correctly classified all seven of the latent fingerprints. Concerning the relatively poor outcome of the test, the editor of <i>Forensic Identification,</i> David Grieve, was quoted as follows (http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people7m/ brandon_mayfield/index.html):</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="quote">Errors of this magnitude within a discipline singularly admired and respected for its touted absolute certainty as an identification process have produced chilling and mind-numbing realities. Thirty-four participants, an incredible 22% of those involved, substituted presumed but false certainty for truth. By any measure, this represents a profile of practice that is unacceptable and thus demands positive action by the entire community.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indent">A famous example of this problem occurred in 2004 after a terrorist bombing of a train in Madrid, Spain. A number of latent fingerprints were found by the Spanish National Police after the bombing. These latent prints were then forwarded to the U.S. FBI for possible identification.</p>
<p class="indent">Using their latest equipment, the Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS), the FBI identified a lawyer in Oregon as matching one of the prints. The IAFIS system contains the fingerprints of more than 54 million people. Most of the fingerprint records are associated with people who have some kind of criminal record. However, perhaps 1.5 million of the fingerprints on record are of individuals who do not have criminal records. They are prints that have been collected as a result of applying for a federal job or similar civilian activity.</p>
<p class="indent">The FBI initially said that the match was 100% positive. The Spanish Nation Police, however, disagreed with the findings of the IAFIS and concluded that there was not a match. After 2 weeks passed, another person was identified by the Spanish National Police as matching the fingerprint. In May 2004, the FBI admitted they had made a mistake, and the Oregon lawyer was released from jail.</p>
<p class="indent">Later in January 2006, a U.S. Justice Department report indicated that mistaken identification by the FBI was due to poor application of methodology by the FBI examiners. As an aside, the Oregon lawyer whose fingerprints were misidentified by the FBI was an American convert to Islam who had<span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_33" aria-label=" Page 33. "/>married an Egyptian immigrant. The FBI and the Oregon lawyer settled out of court for a considerable monetary sum and the FBI formally apologized in late 2006 for the mistake.</p>
<p class="indent">The above event aside, advances have been made in fingerprinting such that minute traces of the grease and oil that make up a person&#x2019;s fingerprint can be analyzed for various organic compounds that indicate something significant about the person&#x2019;s medical condition, lifestyle, or occupation. For example, smokers can be identified by the traces of nicotine metabolites that are left in their fingerprints.</p>
<p class="indent">Returning to the subject of falsification, until recently, medical researchers, especially that associated with drugs for the treatment of diseases, tended to publish papers that primarily touted clinical successes. When a drug appeared to cure a disease or significantly diminish its effects, the test results were readily published in professional journals. The good results were then promoted and quoted in business periodicals. This usually led to high profits for the company that underwrote the research, and fame for the principal researchers.</p>
<p class="indent">On the other hand, research that revealed negative or undesirable aspects of a drug, such as nonperformance, deleterious side effects, or performance less than that of other currently available drugs offered by a competing company, often was either not reported at all or only reported as required, with minimum details. Negative or deleterious clinical test results, while extremely useful to the medical community and especially to patients, often result in losses or reduced profits for drug companies and little peer recognition for the researchers. Consequently, in the matter of drug testing there has been an economic motivation to overlook the principle of falsification.</p>
<p class="indent">The above is an example of how a confirmation bias can develop over time and eventually become institutionalized through repeated positive reinforcement of the behavior.</p>
<p class="indent">This was just one of the many shortcomings of published research concerning the possible harmful effects of smoking conducted by a tobacco industry-sponsored research institute. For years this research institute, ostensively staffed with <i>bona fide</i> scientific researchers, publicly published reports that failed to find any deleterious effects associated with smoking. It wasn&#x2019;t until their private archives were subpoenaed and made public that it was discovered that while reports discussing the harmful effects of smoking did exist, the research institute simply didn&#x2019;t submit them for publication. There was no requirement, other than good scientific practice, to do so.</p>
<p class="indent">In other words, research funded by the tobacco industry that appeared to support the hypothesis that smoking did not cause health problems was published, but research funded by the tobacco industry that appeared to falsify that hypothesis was not published. The subsequent publication record of this research institute confused the public for many years until definitive studies conducted by the Surgeon General&#x2019;s Office concluded that there was, <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_34" aria-label=" Page 34. "/>indeed, a direct link between smoking and lung cancer, emphysema, and heart disease.</p>
<p class="indent">More recently, a similar reluctance to publish negative data allegedly occurred concerning a drug called Paxil, an antidepressant. In this matter, the State of New York sued GlaxoSmithKline for holding back data that allegedly showed that the drug increased the risk of suicide in teenagers.</p>
<p class="indent">A more recent example of confirmation bias involves the drug Zetia, which was initially advertised to reduce both cholesterol and heart disease better than its competition. After Zetia was approved by the FDA, a 2-year clinical trial of 720 patients was undertaken by the manufacturer. Half the population of patients in the trial were given Vytorin, which is a combination of Zetia and Zocor, and half were given Zocor alone. Zocor is also a cholesterol-reducing drug, but is not as good as Zetia. The results of the study were scheduled to be released in March 2007. However, the results were not made public until January 2008, and were not published in a peer-reviewed journal until March 2008. The results indicated that patients taking the Zetia-Zocor combination drug were more or less at the same risk for heart disease as the patients who took Zocor alone.</p>
<p class="indent">What occurred is that while Zetia did reduce cholesterol better than Zocor alone, it did not prevent the buildup of plaque on the interior of arteries, which can lead to heart attacks. In other words, it had been presumed that a greater reduction in cholesterol would consequently result in a greater reduction of heart attacks. What the trial showed, however, was that while Zetia combined with Zocor was more effective at reducing cholesterol, it was not more effective at reducing the buildup of plaque on artery walls. In fact, the Zetia-Zocor combination drug may have slightly exacerbated plaque buildup since it was noted that the arterial walls were somewhat thicker when the combination drug was taken than when Zocor was taken alone. (See Kastelein, J., et al., &#x201C;Simvastin with or without Ezetimibe [Zetia] in Familial Hypercholesterolemia,&#x201D; <i>The New England Journal of Medicine, </i>358 (2008): 1431-43.)</p>
<p class="indent">For reasons such as these, a group of scientific journal editors announced that beginning in July 2005, all clinical trials have to be registered in a public database (see http://clinicaltrials.gov) before they are conducted in order for their results to be published. This policy is expected to shift the present bias of publishing only favorable results. By publicly registering before clinical trials are begun, it will be more difficult to hide negative research results. Additionally, a new publication has been initiated, <i>The Journal of Negative Results in Biomedicine</i>. This peer-reviewed journal will be a forum where negative or neutral findings can be reported.</p>
<p class="indent">One last example of the principle of falsification involves the use of a new type of forensic evidence that is coming into its own: pollen identification. Pollen, of course, is just about everywhere where there are plants. Pollen <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_35" aria-label=" Page 35. "/>seems to land and stick on just about every surface. Importantly, some types of pollen are specific to regions, areas, and even individual valleys. In conjunction with plant DNA analysis, some types of pollen can even be traced to a specific plant.</p>
<p class="indent">On humans, pollen can be found not only on and inside clothing, but also on a person&#x2019;s head and body hair, and in his nasal and air passages. The longer the time a person spends in an area, the more pollen that is peculiar to that area he will accumulate on his person. Consequently, the types and amounts of pollen found on a person can indicate where he has been, when he was there, and relatively how long he was there.</p>
<p class="indent">In 1995, more than seven thousand Serbian Muslims, including women and children, were summarily executed at Srebrenica in Bosnia. Their bodies were initially buried in a mass grave. To hide, contaminate, and confuse the forensic evidence, however, the bodies were shrewdly disinterred from the initial mass grave and moved to a new one.</p>
<p class="indent">The Bosnian Serb leaders in power at the time were Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. As of the time of this writing, these two people are still at large. Mladic is still at large. It is rumored he is hiding somewhere in the former country of Yugoslavia. Karadzic has been apprehended and is in custody at the UN Detention Unit in Scheveningen. Both have been indicted by the UN war crimes tribunal at The Hague.</p>
<p class="indent">By examining the bodies in the mass grave for pollen, specific and unique pollen types were identified that could have come from only the original mass grave location. The verifiable pollen matches clearly falsified the premise that the victims had been murdered and buried where they were eventually found, as the perpetrators wished it to appear.</p>
<p class="indent">At the time of the massacre, the territory in which the original mass burial was located was controlled by Bosnian Serb troops, and was a United Nations designated safe zone. The second site was not a United Nations designated safe zone. The documentation of the change in burial location is extremely important. It helps prove that the deaths of these seven thousand people were premeditated genocide perpetrated and approved by the leaders in charge of the Bosnian Serb troops who controlled the area, and were done in defiance of the existing United Nations safe zone designation.</p>
<p class="indent">With respect to the falsification principle, if a person accepts only facts that support the particular hypothesis he treasures, he can overwhelmingly convince himself that the world is flat, that the Holocaust never happened, that astronauts never landed on the moon, that sea shells found at the tops of mountains spontaneously grew there, that Bigfoot roams the Rocky Mountains and only poses for photographers who can&#x2019;t figure out how to focus a camera, that the world began on Thursday, October 23, 4004 B.C. at 9 a. m., or that the planets and the sun travel in perfectly circular orbits around the earth. A perfectly logical case can be prepared to support all of the above <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_36" aria-label=" Page 36. "/>arguments, and many more, if just a few falsifying facts are excluded from consideration.</p>
<p class="indent">Because of this, in debate or at trial, an advocate of a particular argument will attempt to exclude falsifying information by</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">Discrediting the information</li>
<li class="dotch01">Discrediting the bearer of the information</li>
<li class="dotch01">Making up special rules or circumstances that explain the information</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">The last item in the above list is sometimes called an <i>ad hoc</i> hypothesis. Generally it is argumentative in nature rather than being based upon a particular scientific principle or verifiable fact that logically applies to the situation. One of my favorite <i>ad hoc</i> hypotheses that is often used to explain why extrasensory sensory perception does not stand up to laboratory testing is: &#x201C;There are unbelievers in here creating bad vibes that are making the instruments not indicate properly.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">A famously amusing <i>ad hoc</i> hypothesis involves the pseudoscience of biorhythms, the belief that people&#x2019;s performance is governed by several periodic functions that begin at birth and occasionally reinforce or destructively interfere with each other. Biorhythm advocates once claimed, and perhaps still do, that they could use biorhythm theory to predict the sex of babies.</p>
<p class="indent">Using standard analytic techniques and methods, Professor W. Bainbridge at the University of Washington tested this claim. In a paper published in 1978, &#x201C;Biorhythms: Evaluating a Pseudo-Science,&#x201D; he found that biorhythm theory accurately predicted the sex of babies about 50% of the time, which, of course, is no different than just randomly guessing. A defender of the theory, however, proffered the following <i>ad hoc</i> hypothesis to explain why the theory didn&#x2019;t work in the study: Some of the cases where biorhythm theory incorrectly predicted the sex of babies in Dr. Bainbridge&#x2019;s study were due to the fact that these cases included homosexuals, who have indeterminate sex identities.</p>
<p class="indent">When an advocate wants to exclude falsifying information in a more genteel fashion during a live discussion, he will often resort to arguments such as &#x201C;you only report the negative things when there are so many good things to report,&#x201D; or &#x201C;didn&#x2019;t you also find a lot of good things about this,&#x201D; or &#x201C;you always did have it in for this person,&#x201D; to cajole the opponent into voluntarily limiting the introduction of falsifying information. Despite its obvious intent, the gambit is often attempted because sometimes it works.</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec2_4">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec2_4">Iteration: The Evolution of a Hypothesis</h2>
<p class="noindent">An important feature associated with both the old and the modern version&#x2019;s of the scientific method is iteration. The initial hypothesis iteratively evolves <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_37" aria-label=" Page 37. "/>as new information is discovered, verified, considered, and compared to the existing body of information.</p>
<p class="indent">Consequently, if a person asks an investigator, &#x201C;What do you think caused this to occur?&#x201D; during the first part of the investigation, the person may get one answer. If the same question is asked later, the answer may change, and if he asks again when the investigation is finished, the answer may have changed yet again. The final conclusion may significantly differ from the initial hypothesis.</p>
<p class="indent">The fact that a hypothesis evolves as an investigation progresses and more evidence is uncovered often frustrates administrators and reporters who have deadlines. They want to receive a simple answer to their query that will not change, and they want to receive it right now. They don&#x2019;t like waiting for laboratory tests or additional confirming investigative work to be done. In many cases, they already think they know what the answer is. Consequently, they feel any more investigate work is simply redundant and wasteful.</p>
<p class="indent">Often they set artificial schedules and deadlines for when they think the investigation should be completed and may attempt to manage the investigation as if it were a well-defined construction project. They want to be the first people to know the correct answer and loathe having to issue a correction or an amendment after their first official pronouncement. They also don&#x2019;t like unexpected evidence turning up that upsets everything that has occurred previously. A changing hypothesis makes them uneasy, arouses their suspicion, and sometimes causes them embarrassment.</p>
<p class="indent">They may say something like, &#x201C;I thought you told me the cause of this was X, and now you tell it is Y. What gives? I have already fired [or arrested, banished, tortured, burned at the stake, etc.] the guy who you said did it.&#x201D; Explaining to people who are unfamiliar with how the scientific method works that new information that sometimes requires a hypothesis to be modified can be trying for both parties.</p>
<p class="indent">Some administrative and governmental processes, unfortunately, are not amenable to changes or modifications once they have been put into motion. Administrative processes often cannot change easily as new information is discovered during an investigation. Once an administrative process has begun, starting, stopping, or modifying it can be hard and often has deleterious consequences. Also, once an answer is provided, the follow-up correction or modification is often not heard, believed, or acted upon. First impressions can create an administrative momentum that is very hard to redirect.</p>
<p class="indent">This is what occurred during the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta, Georgia. On Saturday, July 27, 1996, at 1:20 a.m., a bombing occurred in a public area where a dance was being held. (Jack Mack and the Heart Attack were playing.) One person was killed and 111 were injured. Another person was killed en route to the bombing scene.</p>
<p class="indent">Just prior to the pipe bomb&#x2019;s detonating, a 911 call had been made by an unknown person warning of the bomb. A security guard in the area noted a <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_38" aria-label=" Page 38. "/>suspicious green knapsack in front of a sound technician&#x2019;s booth. He alerted the local police and was clearing the area around the knapsack when the pipe bomb detonated.</p>
<p class="indent">Initially, the security guard was hailed as a hero and was even commended by the president in a statement. Clearing the area just before the bomb detonated likely did save lives and mitigate injuries. On July 30, 1996, however, the <i>Atlanta Journal Constitution</i> published an extra edition with the headline &#x201C;FBI Suspects Hero Guard May Have Planted Bomb.&#x201D; Various news organizations then picked up the story.</p>
<p class="indent">The identity of the bombing suspect and the reasons for suspecting him were somehow leaked to the press from one of the investigating agencies. The press then followed closely the progress of the investigation. In some cases, the press appeared to react more quickly to investigation events than did the authorities. For example, the press had already staked out the security guard&#x2019;s apartment and the cameras were rolling when the FBI showed up to serve him a search warrant.</p>
<p class="indent">The press camped on the security guard&#x2019;s apartment doorsteps day after day in order to get exclusive, perhaps controversial, video footage and interviews. As the FBI searched the security guard&#x2019;s apartment and other locations where he had worked, took hair samples, took voice samples, towed his pickup truck away for examination, took fingerprints, had dogs smell through his apartment, removed some of his belongings in plastic evidence boxes, and otherwise searched exhaustively for any physical evidence that might link him to the bombing, the networks and news agencies publicly documented, photographed, and televised each humiliating event.</p>
<p class="indent">Every night for several weeks, accounts of the search for physical evidence to link the security guard with the bombing were shown regularly on national and regional television networks and published in national and regional newspaper articles. The press repeatedly showed pictures and video clips of the suspect looking suspicious and defensive as he attempted to walk through the swarm of cameras and tape recorders thrust at him. The strain of constant attention from the press while he was simultaneously being questioned and his home and property minutely searched clearly showed.</p>
<p class="indent">On their own initiative, the press conducted their own investigation. They interviewed friends, neighbors, and acquaintances who had known him in the past and used this information to publicly dissect and psychoanalyze his life. They aired interviews with various psychologists who described the &#x201C;lone bomber&#x201D; criminal profile for the benefit of the viewing audience and how this might apply in this situation. One entrepreneurial news organization even rented an apartment that faced the suspect&#x2019;s home apartment in order to keep its cameras on him around the clock. The attention from the news media was relentless.</p>
<p class="indent">One reason given on television for the security guard&#x2019;s being suspected was that he allegedly fit a psychological &#x201C;hero&#x201D; profile that was apparently being <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_39" aria-label=" Page 39. "/>tested by one of the investigating agencies. Heroes in this sense are people, often in low-echelon or low-status positions, who promote or stage emergency events. Because they position themselves convenient to the emergency, these events then allow them to save people or property and be heroes. They do this to fulfill a strong need for praise and recognition that is otherwise outside their reach.</p>
<p class="indent">Heroes had previously occurred in other situations where bombs were discovered. In 1984, for example, a Los Angeles policeman placed a bomb on a public bus, and then was a hero when he was the first person to discover it and save the people on the bus.</p>
<p class="indent">With respect to the hero profile, one news organization reported the following:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="quote">They don&#x2019;t have a lot of evidence on him [the security guard] yet, but it may come pretty quickly. Still, they&#x2019;re not breaking out the champagne yet&#x2026;. This does fit a profile.. There are people&#x2014;cop groupies&#x2014;who like to penetrate crimes and then aggrandize themselves. Some even provide interviews afterward. I&#x2019;m not saying he [the security guard] did it, but it is something the F.B.I. is taking very seriously.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indent">The spectacle carried on until October 23, 1996, when a federal judge ordered the FBI to make public within 5 days the affidavits used to obtain search warrants of the security guard&#x2019;s property. In a subsequent memorandum filed with the U.S. District Court a few days after the court order, the government cited seven reasons why the governmental investigating agency had believed the security guard was a suspect:</p>
<ol class="ol">
<li class="number">A knapsack that belonged to the security guard, which a witness reportedly had seen, was similar to the one that contained the pipe bomb and was reportedly missing.</li>
<li class="number">It was reported by a witness that he heard a loud explosion and observed smoke in the woods near the security guard&#x2019;s property. (This was cited presumably to suggest experimentation prior to the event.)</li>
<li class="number">Prior to the event, the security guard was reported by a witness to have told another person that someday he would become famous.</li>
<li class="number">He took an extended break prior to the bombing, for 15 to 20 minutes, which reportedly was unusual for the security guard.</li>
<li class="number">Prior to the bombing, the security guard resisted reassignment to another area of the park.</li>
<li class="number">About 4 to 6 weeks prior to the bombing and during the sound towers&#x2019; construction, a witness said the security guard inquired whether they could stand up to an explosion.</li>
<li class="number">A witness reported that the security guard was seen at a college with a sketch that looked like a bomb.</li>
</ol>
<p class="noindent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_40" aria-label=" Page 40. "/>Does the reader note the common element in all seven items?</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="hint1">Hint 1:With respect to item 5, do you think it would be more fun to guard a place where a live band was performing, or somewhere else at 1 o&#x2019;clock in the morning where nothing was happening? Is this suspicious behavior or is it reasonable behavior?</p>
<p class="hint2">Hint 2:Go back to Chapter 1 and review the initial logic used to conclude that the propane furnace caused the fire and note the similarities.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">The document listing the seven reasons, however, also stated, &#x201C;To be sure, it is quite possible that [the security guard] had no involvement in the bombing. There are numerous suspects and leads in the case entirely unrelated to [the security guard] and there is evidence suggesting that [the security guard] did not commit the crime&#x201D; (http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9 802E3D61639F934A15753CIA960958260&amp;sec=&amp;spon=&amp;pagewanted=all).</p>
<p class="indent">On October 26, 1996, federal prosecutors indicated the security guard was no longer a suspect.</p>
<p class="indent">Evidence discovered later completely exonerated the security guard and implicated another person. This other person was named as a suspect in the Atlanta Olympics bombing by the Department of Justice on February 14, 1998. The new suspect appeared to also be involved in several other bombings, including some in Atlanta and some in Birmingham, Alabama. In some of these other bombings, people were injured and killed.</p>
<p class="indent">The new suspect allegedly was connected to a Christian identity group that was avidly antigay, anti-abortion, anti-Semitic, antigovernment, and so on. This connection allegedly provided a clear motive, as opposed to a profile, that linked all the bombings. Note that the hero profile that caused the FBI to suspect the security guard in the first place did not apply to the new suspect.</p>
<p class="indent">This time, however, the investigation had physical evidence that linked the new suspect to the various bombings. Steel plates reportedly used in the Atlanta Olympics bombing were traced back to a metal working plant in rural North Carolina. A person who worked at the metal working plant was a friend of the same person implicated in the Birmingham bombings. The plates were used to direct debris from the explosion.</p>
<p class="indent">Other physical features common to the pipe bombs were also noted and traced. In one instance in Atlanta where allegedly two bombs were to be detonated at the same time, one of them did not detonate. It was recovered and was very useful to be compared with the remains of the ones that did detonate. In short, this time they were following the evidence without a confirmation bias.</p>
<p class="indent">The new suspect was eventually named to the FBI&#x2019;s Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list, and a $1,000,000 reward was offered. After being named on <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_41" aria-label=" Page 41. "/>the FBI list, the new suspect apparently spent 5 years in the Appalachian Mountains dodging the authorities. He became a minor folk hero to those sympathetic to antiabortion, antigay, antigovernment, and anti-Semitic causes until he was apprehended on May 31, 2003, in North Carolina. At the time, he was reportedly scavenging for food in a trash bin behind a grocery store.</p>
<p class="indent">On April 13, 2005, the suspect, Mr. Eric Rudolf, pled guilty to four bombings:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">The July 1996 bombing at the Summer Olympics&#x2014;where one woman was killed and over one hundred were injured</li>
<li class="dotch01">A January 1997 bombing of an Atlanta office building that contained an abortion clinic&#x2014;where six people were hurt</li>
<li class="dotch01">A February 1997 bombing of an allegedly lesbian Atlanta nightclub&#x2014; where five people were hurt</li>
<li class="dotch01">A January 1998 bombing at an abortion clinic&#x2014;where a nurse was injured and a policeman was killed</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">In return for his guilty plea, Mr. Rudolf avoided capital punishment charges. Instead, he was given four consecutive life sentences without parole. After Mr. Rudolf was sentenced, his sister, Deborah Rudolph, reportedly said, &#x201C;He believes that the Bible is the history of the white race, and that the other races in the Bible, you know, are just&#x2014;he would call them &#x2018;mud people.&#x2019;&#x201D; She further reportedly said that the Olympics were a target because they featured &#x201C;all these people coming from all different countries and cultures and colors and races and religions, all coming together in one place&#x201D; (http://transcripts. cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0504/11/pzn.01.html).</p>
<p class="indent">This case is a good example of what happens when evidence collection is driven by theory, that is, by a confirmation bias, rather than a theory being driven by the evidence.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the more bizarre aspects of this affair occurred during the time the new suspect was a fugitive. The new suspect reportedly visited his gay brother and, over dinner, forcefully quoted a conservative radio talk show host to him. Apparently inspired by this, on March 7, 1998, the brother cut off one of his hands with a portable electric saw and videotaped the event in order to &#x201C;send a message to the FBI and the media.&#x201D; The hand, by the way, was sewn back on successfully.</p>
<p class="indent">With respect to the original suspect, the security guard, despite the sincere apology of the investigating organization, his professional reputation was devastated after having been labeled as a terrorist bomber night after night on the television news and in newspapers and news magazines. The security guard sued various parties and settlements were reached. His law enforcement career and reputation were somewhat rehabilitated, especially after Mr. Rudolf was caught and sentenced. In 2006, 10 years after the event, <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_42" aria-label=" Page 42. "/>the governor of Georgia honored him for having saved lives by his actions on the day of the bombing. The accused security guard, however, did not live happily every after. He died in 2007 at the age of 44, having suffered for some years from the effects of diabetes, heart problems, and kidney problems.</p>
<p class="indent">This is an example why many investigators should not disclose anything to people outside the immediate investigative team while an investigation is in progress. Only when the investigators are confident that there is no more significant information, and all the significant assessment that can be done has been done, should they publicly unveil their conclusions and assessments.</p>
<p class="indent">Of course, a critical reader at this point might pose the following questions:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">Why didn&#x2019;t the investigators in the Atlanta Summer Olympics bombing affair work harder at the beginning of the case to falsify the initial premise?</li>
<li class="dotch01">Why was the principle of falsification applied so late in the case?</li>
<li class="dotch01">Why did it take intervention by a judge to apparently put the investigation on the right track?</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec2_5">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec2_5">Lessons Learned</h2>
<p class="noindent">At this point, I could discuss more examples like the Oregon lawyer who was misidentified by a fingerprint as one of the Madrid bomber terrorists or like the security guard who was misidentified as the bomber at the Atlanta Summer Olympics. The point is that boneheaded mistakes are made when investigators allow themselves to be caught up in a confirmation bias, the tendency to prove the hypothesis that they already believe, and forget to apply the principle of falsification.</p>
<p class="indent">In the Oregon lawyer event, the FBI appeared to allow the fact that the lawyer was Muslim and married to an Egyptian immigrant influence their judgment in assessing the fingerprint. These facts apparently made an initially close match appear even closer.</p>
<p class="indent">Likewise with the Atlanta Olympics matter, even assuming that the psychological hero profile was valid, was it logical to presume that one and only one person could fit the hero profile? And if more than one person could fit the profile, would they all be bombers, would just some be bombers, or would just the one they tested be the bomber? Was the matter finally settled by a federal judge because no subordinate in the agency had sufficient standing to question the judgment of the person applying the hero profile?</p>
<p class="indent">As the reader may well note, critical thinking is an investigator&#x2019;s best friend to keep him out of trouble.</p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>
