<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 3:More about the Fundamental Method</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="toc" role="doc-toc">
<header>
<section class="topline"> </section>
<h1 class="chaptername01"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_43" aria-label=" Page 43. "/>More about the <span class="block"/>Fundamental Method</h1>
<p class="number02">3</p>
<p class="underline"></p>
<p class="doi">DOI:10-9781420095806-3</p>
<p class="intro">When people thought the Earth was flat, they were wrong. When people thought the Earth was spherical, they were wrong. But if you think that thinking the Earth is spherical is just as wrong as thinking the Earth is flat, then your view is wronger than both of them put together.</p>
<p class="intro1">Isaac Asimov, from <i>The Relativity of Wrong,</i> 1996</p>
</header>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_1">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_1">More Historical Background</h2>
<p class="noindent">The roots of the scientific method go back to ancient Greece, to Aristotle&#x2019; s elucidation of the inductive method. By the way, Aristotle, who lived from 384 to 322 BC, was Alexander the Great&#x2019; s private tutor. Aristotle died a year before Alexander died. It must have been a point of pride that one of Aristotle&#x2019; s students really did put his education to work to conquer the world.</p>
<p class="indent">In the inductive method, a principle or proposition is put forward. The principle or proposition is then tested against the available evidence that has been obtained through unbiased observations and fact gathering. In assessing all the observations and facts, an underlying commonality is shown to exist in all the verified data that demonstrates the principle or proposition.</p>
<p class="indent">The Greeks, however, generally preferred the deductive method for investigations and did not often use their knowledge of the inductive method to investigate phenomena. Aristotle, himself, is more famous for having developed the standard deductive form of logical argumentation: the syllogism.</p>
<p class="indent">The successes of the Greeks in applying the deductive method to geometry, and their reluctance to actively research, experiment, and gather facts in the field, further contributed to this tendency. At that time, many believed that the nature of the universe could eventually be understood through the power of intellect alone. In other words, if a person were truly smart enough, facts and physical evidence were unnecessary. A person sufficiently smart could figure everything out by just thinking clearly and logically.</p>
<p class="indent">Roger Bacon, a thirteenth-century English Franciscan monk, is often credited with initiating the modern scientific method by combining scientific experimentation and the inductive method. He believed that scientific knowledge should be obtained by close observation and experimentation. Friar Bacon experimented with gunpowder, lodestones, and optics, to <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_44" aria-label=" Page 44. "/>mention a few items, and was dubbed &#x201C;Doctor Admirabilis&#x201D; because of his extensive knowledge.</p>
<p class="indent">Friar Bacon studied at Oxford. As most students of his time, he initially studied the trivium course of study, which included grammar, logic, and rhetoric. Later, he progressed to the quadrivium, which included geometry, arithmetic, music, and astronomy. Roger Bacon&#x2019; s studies included the works of Aristotle, whose writings were a major part of his studies. He received a master&#x2019; s degree in 1241 and stayed on for a time at Oxford as a teacher himself.</p>
<p class="indent">While Roger Bacon attended Oxford, the teachings of Aristotle had been banned at the University of Paris because Aristotle had not been a Christian. (It would have been a neat trick if he had been.) In the early 1240s, however, Aristotle&#x2019; s works were reintroduced into the curriculum at the University of Paris, and Friar Bacon was asked to be a lecturer on Aristotle in the Faculty of Arts. As was the custom at universities then, all of his lectures about Aristotle were given in classical Latin.</p>
<p class="indent">While at Oxford, Roger Bacon had not been interested in science. However, during his time at the University of Paris he met Peter Peregrinus, a scientific experimenter. Bacon said of Peregrinus during this time that he &#x201C;gains knowledge of matters of nature, medicine, and alchemy through experiment, and all that is in the heaven and in the earth beneath&#x201D; <i>(The First Scientist</i> by Brian Clegg).</p>
<p class="indent">The friendship with Peter Peregrinus, who later wrote an important treatise on magnets, at the University of Paris spurred Roger Bacon&#x2019; s interest in mathematics and natural philosophy. When Roger Bacon returned to Oxford in 1247, it became his life&#x2019; s work (www.crystalinks.com/bacon.html). One of his important contributions to science in that period was the application of geometry to optics. From this work, he concluded that applying mathematics to real-world problems was necessary to not only quantify what was occurring, but also use it as a predictive tool. Bacon stated: &#x201C;Mathematics is the door and the key to the sciences.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">Bacon also used lenses to systematically enhance his ability to observe, that is, to extend his personal senses (www.mysteriousbritain.co.uk/occult/ roger-bacon.html). This was daring for the time because many people regarded information gained through the senses as unreliable and subject to the machinations of the devil. Most importantly, Roger Bacon planned, executed, and interpreted experiments using the scientific method, much as it is practiced today.</p>
<p class="indent">In 1250, Bacon published a letter, the modern equivalent of a paper or scientific article, entitled <i>De Mirabile Poteste Artis et Naturae</i> (Concerning the Extraordinary Power of Technical Skill and the Natural Order of Things). In this letter, Bacon reviewed some of his achievements in optics and ideas he had for some mechanical devices. Being a friar, Bacon was a devout Christian. He <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_45" aria-label=" Page 45. "/>sincerely believed that scientific investigations would help in understanding the world and, in doing so, would aid in understanding what God had created.</p>
<p class="indent">His superiors, however, did not share this view. For his efforts to put knowledge on a verifiable basis, the curious friar was accused of necromancy, heresy, and black magic by the chiefs of his order. As a result of these accusations, he was confined to a monastery for 10 years in Paris so that he could be watched.</p>
<p class="indent">During this time of confinement he attempted to persuade Pope Clement IV to allow experimental science to be taught at the university. His efforts failed. He was, however, allowed to teach mathematics in that period and worked on reforming the calendar. His calendar reforms were not acted on by the pope at the time. Three hundred years later his reforms were finally adopted with little change. Even after 300 years, Roger Bacon, however, received no personal credit for the work. Some grudges apparently die hard.</p>
<p class="indent">Some of Bacon&#x2019; s scientific proposals and accomplishments include the following:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">He proposed writing an encyclopedia of all the science knowledge by a team of experts.</li>
<li class="dotch01"> He attempted to make science a university subject.</li>
<li class="dotch01">By experiment, he proposed that the maximum altitude of the rainbow was 42&#x00B0;, which was the most accurate value of that time.</li>
<li class="dotch01">He proposed using lenses to build telescopes.</li>
<li class="dotch01">He proposed that the earth was a sphere and that a ship could sail around it.</li>
<li class="dotch01"> He estimated the distance to the sun at 130,000,000 miles.</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">After Pope Clement IV died, Roger Bacon was imprisoned for another 10 years by the next pope, Nicholas III. Nicholas III also specifically forbade the reading of Bacon&#x2019; s papers and books. This was somewhat moot, however, since the church had generally banned his work from publication anyway. Some scholars believe that Roger Bacon was the original inspiration for the Doctor Faustus legend.</p>
<p class="indent">Why all the fuss over a friar who wanted to play in the laboratory? It is because the authorities believed experimental science threatened the public perception of the correctness of theories promulgated by the church. At the time of Friar Bacon, the doctrine of apriorism was the accepted basis for inquiry. All findings had to agree with the fundamental tenets of the church, as interpreted by the various church authorities. Anything that appeared to disagree with these tenets was, obviously, the work of the devil to tempt poor mortals and could not be tolerated.</p>
<p class="indent">The contributions of Lord Francis Bacon in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries have already been briefly discussed. After Francis Bacon, several other notable scientists further advanced the notion of the <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_46" aria-label=" Page 46. "/>scientific method, notably Nicholas Steno, whose application of the scientific method was the foundation of modern geology.</p>
<p class="indent">By rigorously applying the scientific method, Steno showed that sea shells found on the tops of mountains and within rock layers well buried and distant from the sea did not spontaneously grow there, as was popularly believed at the time. Based upon the evidence, Steno argued that these were the shells of real mollusks that had been entrapped there in very ancient times by the deposition of sedimentary rock around them. He also demonstrated that</p>
<ul>
<li class="dotch01"> The various layers of sedimentary rock had been the bottoms of ancient seas, oceans, or lakes</li>
<li class="dotch01">The upper boundary of sedimentary layers had once been level with the horizon</li>
<li class="dotch01">In well-folded rock layers, the tops of the sedimentary layers could be distinguished from the bottoms by the relative particle size: big particles at the bottom and smaller particles on top</li>
<li class="dotch01"> Layers of rock are arranged with the youngest layers on top and the oldest on the bottom</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent">The above findings, based upon experimentation and verifiable observations, form the basis of modern geological stratigraphy.</p>
<p class="indent">Steno was the first person to demonstrate with scientific rigor that the earth was much older than the 6,000-year figure predicated upon Bishop Ussher&#x2019; s estimate. Bishop Ussher had based his estimate upon the lists of generations contained in various books of the Bible.</p>
<p class="indent">Interestingly, later in life Steno converted from Lutheranism to Catholicism, became a priest, and was eventually appointed a bishop. He gave up scientific work after his conversion. Steno died when he was 48, most likely from exhaustion and malnutrition. In the early twentieth century, Pope Pius XI officially indicated that the theology of the Catholic church did not dispute Steno&#x2019; s findings as a scientist. Bishop Steno was beatified by the church in 1988.</p>
<p class="indent">Getting back to the inductive method, a possible pitfall of it, as was well pointed out by David Hume in the eighteenth century, is that the number of observations may be too few or too selective for a true generalization or conclusion to be made. A false conclusion may be reached if the observations or facts are representative of a special subset rather than the general set. This was the case in the flat earth hypothesis already discussed. This is why it is necessary to actively seek falsification rather than patiently wait for enough nonselective facts to accumulate for a true generalization to be made.</p>
<p class="indent">In the nineteenth century, George Boole, who lived from 1815 to 1864, systematically organized logic into a symbolic algebra. A professor of mathematics at Queens College, Cork, Ireland, Boole published <i>An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which Are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_47" aria-label=" Page 47. "/>Probabilities </i> in 1854. This publication led the way for the symbolic logic developed later by Bertrand Russell, Alfred North Whitehead, and Clarence Irving Lewis in the first half of the twentieth century. Boolean algebra, which has rules and symbols reminiscent of ordinary algebra, is used to solve problems in logic much as ordinary algebra is used to solve numerical problems. It is the basis for modern switching theory and electronic computer programming.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the more colorful characters who advanced failure investigation methodology in the nineteenth century was a relatively unheralded French detective named Francois Vidocq (1775&#x2013;1857). Vidocq changed criminal investigation work, almost single-handedly, by emphasizing systematic evidence gathering, evidence preservation, and evidence analysis techniques.</p>
<p class="indent">In essence, Vidocq worked to enlarge on a practical basis the amount of physical evidence available upon which an inductive hypothesis could be based. As noted previously, the sureness of an inductive hypothesis improves as the database widens and diversifies. This minimizes the chance of developing a false conclusion based upon a special subset.</p>
<p class="indent">Previous to Vidocq, most criminal investigative work depended primarily upon eyewitness testimony. Unfortunately, eyewitness testimony was generally not compared to physical evidence to test its veracity. Instead, the weight given to eyewitness testimony was a function of a person&#x2019; s standing and reputation. People of good reputation and high standing were believed; people of poor reputation or low standing were discounted.</p>
<p class="indent">While not logically defensible, this investigative method was easy to administer. Simply ask a few people with good reputations what they thought happened, and then act accordingly. Consequently, most trials were a series of argumentative accusations, denials, and alibis. Very little physical evidence was collected, often it was not properly preserved or documented, and even more rarely was it evaluated scientifically.</p>
<p class="indent">Beginning as a spy for the Paris police, that is, a snitch, informer, stoolie, or fink, by 1811, Monsieur Vidocq had become the Surete&#x2019; s first appointed chief. The Surete is France&#x2019; s equivalent of the detective bureau of the FBI or England&#x2019; s Scotland Yard. As a youth, Vidocq was a petty criminal and ne&#x2019; er- do-well. He reportedly killed a man in a fencing duel when he was 14 years old. As a soldier in the Bourbon Regiment, he bragged about having had fifteen duels and was repeatedly in and out of jail for gambling, forgery, and similar offenses. Later in life, however, Vidocq used his firsthand knowledge of skullduggery to accomplish the following:</p>
<ul>
<li class="dotch01">Invented the method of making plaster casts of footprints and impressions at the crime scene to permanently preserve them</li>
<li class="dotch01">Patented unalterable bond paper and some indelible inks</li>
<li class="dotch01">Founded the first modern detective and credit bureau</li>
<li class="dotch01">Developed systematic record keeping of criminal records</li>
<li class="dotch01"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_48" aria-label=" Page 48. "/>Introduced ballistics into police work</li>
<li class="dotch01">Employed systematic surveillance as part of the investigative process, effectively employing disguises and subterfuges</li>
<li class="dotch01">Formalized systematic criminal investigations</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">After he had served in the Surete and then a 5-year stint as a publisher, Vidocq set up the first private detective agency and credit bureau, <i>Le Bureau Des Renseignmnets,</i> whose motto was: hatred of rogues, and boundless devotion to the trade.</p>
<p class="indent">In this capacity Vidocq inspired many writers. Sir Conan Doyle based Sherlock Holmes upon Vidocq&#x2019; s exploits as a private consulting detective, especially Holmes&#x2019; s technique of linking physical evidence found at the crime scene to the perpetrator. In Victor Hugo&#x2019; s <i>Les Miserables,</i> both Jean Val Jean and Inspector Javert are based upon Vidocq. In Edgar Allen Poe&#x2019; s &#x201C;Murders in the Rue Morgue,&#x201D; which by some is considered to be the first modern detective story, the narrator refers to Vidocq&#x2019; s methods. First published as a short story in <i>Graham&#x2019; s Magazine</i> in 1841, &#x201C;Murders&#x201D; provides an interesting description of the method. While it is somewhat wordy, it bears repeating and is quoted below.</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="quote">The mental features discoursed of as the analytical, are, in themselves, but little susceptible of analysis. We appreciate them only in their effects. We know of them, among other things, that they are always to their possessor, when inordinately possessed, a source of the liveliest enjoyment. As the strong man exults in his physical ability, delighting in such exercises as call his muscles into action, so glories the analyst in that moral activity which disentangles.He derives pleasure from even the most trivial occupations bringing his talent into play. He is fond of enigmas, of conundrums, hieroglyphics; exhibiting in his solutions of each a degree of acumen which appears to the ordinary apprehension praeternatural. His results, brought about by the very soul and essence of method, have, in truth, the whole air of intuition.</p>
<p class="quote1">The faculty of resolution is possibly much invigorated by mathematical study, and especially by that highest branch of it which, unjustly, and merely on account of its retrograde operations, has been called, as if par excellence, analysis. Yet to calculate is not in itself to analyze. A chess-player, for example, does the one, without effort at the other. It follows that the game of chess, in its effects upon mental character, is greatly misunderstood. I am not now writing a treatise, but simply prefacing a somewhat peculiar narrative by observations very much at random; I will, therefore, take occasion to assert that the higher powers of the reflective intellect are more decidedly and more usefully tasked by the unostentatious game of draughts than by all the elaborate frivolity of chess. In this latter, where the pieces have different and bizarre motions, with various and variable values, what is only complex, is mistaken (a not unusual error) for what is profound. The attention is here called powerfully into play. If it flag for an instant, an oversight is committed, resulting in injury or defeat. The <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_49" aria-label=" Page 49. "/>possible moves being not only manifold, but involute, the chances of such oversights are multiplied; and in nine cases out of ten, it is the more concentrative rather than the more acute player who conquers. In draughts, on the contrary, where the moves are unique and have but little variation, the probabilities of inadvertence are diminished, and the mere attention being left comparatively unemployed, what advantages are obtained by either party are obtained by superior acumen. To be less abstract, let us suppose a game of draughts where the pieces are reduced to four kings, and where, of course, no oversight is to be expected. It is obvious that here the victory can be decided (the players being at all equal) only by some recherch&#x00E9; movement, the result of some strong exertion of the intellect. Deprived of ordinary resources, the analyst throws himself into the spirit of his opponent, identifies himself therewith, and not unfrequently sees thus, at a glance, the sole methods (sometimes indeed absurdly simple ones) by which he may seduce into error or hurry into miscalculation.</p>
<p class="quote1">Whist has long been known for its influence upon what is termed the calculating power; and men of the highest order of intellect have been known to take an apparently unaccountable delight in it, while eschewing chess as frivolous. Beyond doubt there is nothing of a similar nature so greatly tasking the faculty of analysis. The best chess-player in Christendom may be little more than the best player of chess; but proficiency in whist implies a capacity for success in all these more important undertakings where mind struggles with mind. When I say proficiency, I mean that perfection in the game which includes a comprehension of all the sources whence legitimate advantage may be derived. These are not only manifold, but multiform, and lie frequently among recesses of thought altogether inaccessible to the ordinary understanding. To observe attentively is to remember distinctly; and, so far, the concentrative chess-player will do very well at whist; while the rules of Hoyle (themselves based upon the mere mechanism of the game) are sufficiently and generally comprehensible. Thus to have a retentive memory, and proceed by &#x201C;the book&#x201D; are points commonly regarded as the sum total of good playing. But it is in matters beyond the limits of mere rule that the skill of the analyst is evinced. He makes, in silence, a host of observations and inferences. So, perhaps, do his companions; and the difference in the extent of the information obtained, lies not so much in the validity of the inference as in the quality of the observation. The necessary knowledge is that of what to observe. Our player confines himself not at all; nor, because the game is the object, does he reject deductions from things external to the game. He examines the countenance of his partners, comparing it carefully with that of each of his opponents. He considers the mode of assorting the cards in each hand; often counting trump by trump, and honor by honor, through the glances bestowed by their holders upon each. He notes every variation of face as the play progresses, gathering a fund of thought from the differences in the expression of certainty, of surprise, of triumph, or chagrin. From the manner of gathering up a trick he judges whether the person taking it, can make another in the suit. He recognizes what is played through feint, by the manner with which it is thrown upon <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_50" aria-label=" Page 50. "/>the table. A casual or inadvertent word; the accidental dropping or turning of a card, with the accompanying anxiety or carelessness in regard to its concealment; the counting of the tricks, with the order of their arrangement; embarrassment, hesitation, eagerness, or trepidation&#x2014;  all afford, to his apparently intuitive perception, indications of the true state of affairs. The first two or three rounds having been played, he is in full possession of the contents of each hand, and thenceforward puts down his cards with as absolute a precision of purpose as if the rest of the party had turned outward the faces of their own.</p>
<p class="quote1">The analytical power should not be confounded with simple ingenuity; for while the analyst is necessarily ingenious, the ingenious man is often remarkably incapable of analysis. The constructive or combining power, by which ingenuity is usually manifested, and to which the phrenologists (I believe erroneously) have assigned a separate organ, supposing it a primitive faculty, has been so frequently seen in those whose intellect bordered otherwise upon idiocy, as to have attracted general observation among writers on morals. Between ingenuity and the analytic ability there exists a difference far greater, indeed, than that between the fancy and the imagination, but of a character very strictly analogous. It will be found, in fact, that the ingenious are always fanciful, and the truly imaginative never otherwise than analytic.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indent">An interesting quasi-legacy of Vidocq is the exclusive Vidocq Society. This nonprofit organization meets monthly on the top floor of the Public Ledger Building in Philadelphia, where the members honor Monsieur Vidocq by applying their forensic skills to unsolved death cases. The society indicates that their members are forensic professionals who donate their talents <i>pro bono</i> to cases brought to them that meet their criteria.</p>
<p class="indent">In the 1930s, Karl Popper discussed in <i>The Logic of Scientific Discovery </i>how the physical laws of science have evolved through a succession of falsified hypotheses. He observed that an initial hypothesis is put forward that has some explanatory value. As verifiable experiences widen, this theory is falsified and then replaced with a new one that has a greater ability to explain the known facts. Interestingly, he noted that each new hypothesis that has greater explanatory utility has greater potential for falsification.</p>
<p class="indent">Popper also proposed a test of whether a proposition or hypothesis was actually scientific. A proposition or hypothesis is scientific, he proposed, if it is falsifiable. That is, there must be an experiment, observation, or perhaps prediction that could prove the hypothesis to be wrong, depending upon the outcome or observation. If a proposition or hypothesis does not have the ability to be disproved by some empirical measure, it is not scientific according to Popper.</p>
<p class="indent">Moral sentiments, according to Popper, like murder is a mortal sin, are not scientific, for example, because they are not subject to empirical falsification. Such assertions are simply philosophical, religious, or personal moral <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_51" aria-label=" Page 51. "/>judgments. Likewise, a theist, that is, a person who believes in God or a god, would agree that the existence of God is not falsifiable because God transcends human knowledge and experience. The belief in magic, miracles, God, gods, spirits, that all life is just a dream, solipsism, and the like are also not falsifiable. The belief that God or a god does not exist is also not falsifiable. These beliefs cannot be tested by experiment and are not capable of being falsified, especially to a &#x201C;true believer&#x201D; or a confirmed nonbeliever.</p>
<p class="indent">The logic of many conspiracy theories is often constructed such that they cannot be falsified. All contrary evidence or testimony is explained away by the conspiracy itself. For example, all contrary testimony or eyewitness statements were coerced by the conspirators, any contrary evidence was manufactured by the conspirators, the &#x201C;real&#x201D; witnesses have all been killed by the inner cabal of the conspiracy, the &#x201C;real&#x201D; evidence has been suppressed by the conspirators, and so on. Any falsification evidence brought forward is explained away <i>ad hoc</i> by the conspiracy itself using the three rules discussed previously:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">Discredit the information</li>
<li class="dotch01">Discredit the bearer of the information</li>
<li class="dotch01"> Invent special rules or circumstances to explain the information</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">There is no point in investigating an accident, failure, crime, event, effect, or phenomenon if the working hypothesis being pursued cannot be verified by facts and evidence, and cannot withstand scrutiny by falsification. This begs the question: If the hypothesis cannot be falsified, what is the point of investigating it?</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_2">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_2">A Comparison of Deductive and Inductive Reasoning</h2>
<p class="noindent">While the inductive method was well discussed and considered by the Greek thinkers, especially Aristotle, the deductive method was preferred because of its perceived mathematical-like certitude. The deductive method assumes that a general principle, or set of principles, is true, and then constrains or limits the general principle by qualifications until a specific situation or case is concluded.</p>
<p class="indent">In other words, the deductive method:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">Assumes the cause, and then logically reasons to a specific effect that results from that cause</li>
<li class="dotch01">Argues from the general to the particular</li>
<li class="dotch01">Assumes a general set, and then defines or identifies a specific subset by imposing constraints, qualifications, or special circumstances</li>
</ul>
<p class="noindent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_52" aria-label=" Page 52. "/>Deductive arguments are often arranged in the form of a syllogism. Here is an example of a syllogism:</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise:All elephants have four legs.</p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise:Bertha is the name of an elephant at the local zoo.</p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion:Bertha has four legs.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">In the above example, as long as the first two premises are true, the conclusion must also be true. The above is an example of affirming the antecedent, wherein the minor premise asserts that the particular instance, in this case &#x201C;Bertha is the name of an elephant at the local zoo,&#x201D; equates to the antecedent of the major premise, which was &#x201C;All elephants have four legs.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">Another type of syllogism is to deny the consequent, wherein the minor premise asserts that the instance in question does not equate to the conclusion. Here is an example of this type:</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise: All skateboarders are fun loving.</p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise: Bob is not fun loving.</p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion: Bob is not a skateboarder.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">Again, given that the major premise and minor premise are both true, the conclusion follows.</p>
<p class="indent">Here is an example of a bad syllogism, wherein the conclusion reached is incorrect. This type of bad syllogism is called affirming the conclusion. It happens when the minor premise equates a specific quality to the conclusion.</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise:All skateboarders are fun loving.</p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise:George is fun loving.</p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion:George is a skateboarder.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">What is wrong? While it may be true that all skateboarders are fun loving, they are not the only group that is fun loving. While it may be true that George is fun loving, he may belong to one of the other groups that are not skateboarders, but are still fun loving. Thus, while George might be a skateboarder, he might also be a fun-loving person who is not a skateboarder. Thus, the conclusion may be false.</p>
<p class="indent">Another variant of the above incorrect syllogism is called denying the antecedent, wherein the minor premise asserts that a specific instance is not an instance in the major premise.</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise:All skate boarders are fun loving.</p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise:Fred is not a skateboarder.</p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion:Fred is not fun loving.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_53" aria-label=" Page 53. "/>Again, there are many groups besides skateboarders who are fun loving. Fred may belong to one of these other fun-loving groups. So, the fact that he is not a skateboarder does not allow the conclusion to be made that he is not fun loving. For the conclusion to be correct, it would be necessary to find out if Fred belonged to any other fun-loving groups, and there is no information in the syllogism to that end.</p>
<p class="indent">Deductive syllogisms are often not described in terms of true or untrue, but in terms of sound and unsound. This is because the initial premises do not have to be true in order for the argument and the resulting conclusion to be logical, that is, sound. A logical argument is not synonymous with the truth. This is an important distinction and should be remembered when reading the section on sophistry that follows.</p>
<p class="indent">In other words, if one or both of the initial premises are not factually true, a conclusion can be arrived at correctly, that is, with no error in logic, but the conclusion may not be factually true. For example,</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise:All planets move in perfect circles around the earth.</p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise:Mars is a planet.</p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion:Mars moves in a perfect circle around the earth.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">The conclusion is false, of course, but it was arrived at by legitimate reasoning from the major and minor premises. The major premise is factually false, while the minor premise is factually true. As with the flat earth argument, however, the major premise may appear to be true to an uninformed person who does not have all the facts.</p>
<p class="indent">The converse can also be true. That is, an unsound syllogism can be put forward whose major and minor premises are factually true and whose conclusion is factually true, but the conclusion was arrived at by unsound reasoning.</p>
<p class="indent">For example:</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise:Dogs have four legs. <i>(factually true)</i></p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise:Dogs in my town must wear a collar. <i>(factually true)</i></p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion:Phaedough must be a dog because he has four legs and a collar. <i>(Phaedough is indeed a dog.)</i></p>
</section>
<p class="indent">The conclusion is unsound because cats, ferrets, deodorized skunks, and other pets that are taken for walks in this town are also required to wear a collar, and cats, skunks, and ferrets also have four legs. Thus, it cannot be automatically concluded that an animal is a dog because it has four legs and a collar. It might be a dog, but it might also be something else, such as a pet aardvark or a wombat. More information and qualifications are needed to <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_54" aria-label=" Page 54. "/>unequivocally distinguish dogs from cats, or from ferrets, wombats, and so on.</p>
<p class="indent">The following two simple examples of poor deductive reasoning demonstrate how factually true premises can lead to a factually incorrect conclusion. It is left to the reader to determine what went wrong in the logic.</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise:Theft is a felony crime. <i>(This is true, but theft can also be a misdemeanor)</i></p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise:Jim has not been convicted of a felony. <i>(This is true. However, Jim has been convicted of a misdemeanor)</i></p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion:Jim is not a thief. <i>(False, Jim is, indeed, a thief. He was convicted of misdemeanor shoplifting.)</i></p>
</section>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise:When the machinery is operated too fast, it fails. <i>(This is true. It burns out bearings due to lubrication failure)</i></p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise:The machine failed. <i>(This is true)</i></p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion:The machine failed because it was operated too fast. <i>(False. The machine wasn&#x2019; t even being operated at the time.The machine had an electrical short that caused it to fail)</i></p>
</section> 
<p class="indent">As an aside, one of my favorite ersatz syllogisms is from the 1934 MGM motion picture <i>The Thin Man.</i> It was spoken by a female character who was angry at her boyfriend for two-timing her, and had packed her bags to leave him. It goes like this:</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="space1">I don&#x2019; t like crooks.</p>
<p class="space1">But if I did like &#x2018; em, I wouldn&#x2019; t like crooks who are stoolpigeons.</p>
<p class="space1">But if I did like crooks who are stoolpigeons, I still wouldn&#x2019; t like you!</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">Since it is not always possible to have the information to construct a sound deductive argument, a more common type of deductive argument involves the notion of cogency. A cogent argument is one in which, assuming that all the premises are true, the conclusion is probably true, but not necessarily true. A cogent conclusion is, therefore, conditional.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the following example:</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Major premise:Pat is a name equally common to both men and women.</p>
<p class="indent">Minor premise:A person named Pat has the condition anomalopia, that is, partial color blindness wherein red and green are not distinguished well.</p>
<p class="indent">Cogent conclusion:Pat is a man.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">Why is the conclusion cogent? Anomalopia is an inherited condition almost always caused by a specific genetic defect on the X chromosome.</p>
<p class="noindent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_55" aria-label=" Page 55. "/>Eight percent of the male population has anomalopia. Women are generally protected from anomalopia because they have an extra copy of the gene on their second X chromosome, and that duplicate gene is generally not defective. Recall that the XY combination of chromosomes makes boys, while the XX combination makes girls.</p>
<p class="indent">However, while mostly men have the condition, there are, indeed, a few women who also have anomalopia: slightly less than 0.5% of the female population. Thus, the probability that a person named Pat who has anomalopia is a man is slightly greater than 15 in 16, or about 94%. Conversely, the probability that a person named Pat who has anomalopia is a woman is less than 1 in 16, or about 6%.</p>
<p class="indent">In other words, given that the two observations are true, the example conclusion is probably correct, but there is a small chance that it is incorrect.</p>
<p class="indent">What if the major premise in the previous example were now restated as follows?</p>
<p class="major">Major premise: Pat is a name common to men, women, and pets. Of those who are named Pat, 60% are women, 30% are men, and 10% are pets.</p>
<p class=""></p>
<p class="indent">How does this new major premise affect the conclusion?</p>
<p class="indent">Recall that the minor premise indicates a person is involved. Consequently, the category of &#x201C;pets named Pat&#x201D; can be eliminated. The remaining two categories, when proportioned, indicate that one-third of the people named Pat are men and two-thirds of the people named Pat are women.</p>
<p class="indent">Some elementary probability theory then indicates that this improves the chances that the person named Pat with anomalopia might be a woman, but the conclusion that Pat is probably a man is still correct. Here is how the arithmetic works out.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider 1,000 people who are named Pat. According to the new major premise 333 will be men, and 667 will be women. Of the men, 8% will have anomalopia, or 26.64 men. Of the women, slightly less than 0.5% will have anomalopia, or 3.33 women. The ratio of the two groups who both have anomalopia is 26.64 to 3.33, or 8 to 1. Thus, under the conditions described by the new major premise, a person named Pat who has anomalopia has an 8 in 9 chance of being a man, 89%, or a 1 in 9 chance of being a woman, 11%.</p>
<p class="indent">As the above example indicates, cogent or conditional deductive arguments are essentially statistical arguments. Such arguments are improved when several lines of inquiry are used to further limit the chances of being wrong. In other words, the probability that the argument is correct is improved as more information is gathered that could falsify some of the remaining possible ways in which the argument could be wrong.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_56" aria-label=" Page 56. "/>For example, if the fact that Pat&#x2019; s occupation is Marine paratrooper and the fact that Pat has never been observed wearing female apparel by friends and relations were added, the odds that Pat is a man are improved. Each verifiable gender-related independent fact that fails to indicate Pat is female also further improves the certitude of the conclusion that he is male.</p>
<p class="indent">Cogent argumentation is the basis for many crime profile-based methods. Unfortunately, the profile method used to identify likely suspects is often abused and misapplied. (Review the discussion in Chapter 2 of the profile that was used to pursue the security guard in the Summer Olympics bombing case.)</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the following statistics published by the FBI in <i>Crime in the United States, 2002.</i> Of the people convicted of arson in 2002 who were 18 years old or older:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">80.7% were Caucasian</li>
<li class="dotch01">17.6% were African American</li>
<li class="dotch01">0.8% were American Indian or Alaskan Native</li>
<li class="dotch01">0.9% were Asian or Pacific Islander</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">At face value, these statistics might suggest that when arson is committed, an investigator might have a high probability of success in finding the culprit if he simply looks for a likely Caucasian arson suspect. Conversely, any Asian or Pacific Islander suspects can be readily eliminated because they hardly ever commit arson.</p>
<p class="indent">However, now consider the following additional statistics put side by side with the above crime figures.</p> 
<p class="indent">Please note and consider carefully that the FBI data did not contain a Hispanic/Latino category, while the U.S. Census does. Consequently, any Hispanics or Latinos arrested for arson might have been put into either the Caucasian category, the African American category, the Asian and Pacific Islander category, or perhaps the American Indian/Alaskan Native category. How and upon what basis this division was done is not quantified.</p>
<p class="indent">In reviewing <a href="#tab3_1">Table 3.1,</a> and considering how the Hispanic and Latino arson arrests might have been split up, it can be seen that the arrest statistics offer no useful statistical basis for determining the probability of who an arsonist might be. It can be argued convincingly that the racial makeup of arsonists is directly proportional to the racial makeup of Americans in general, and there is no readily apparent data to falsify this conclusion.</p>
<table class="tablech04" id ="tab3_1">
<caption>
<p class="tcaption"><span epub:type="label">Table</span> <span epub:type="ordinal">3.1</span><span class="space"/>Arson Arrests Compared to General Population by Race</p>
</caption> 
<thead class="th">
<tr>
<td>Race Identifier<span class="space"/></td>
<td>Arsonists in 2002<span class="space"/></td>
<td>American Public in 2000 Census<span class="space"/></td>
<td>Ratio of % Arsonists to % in Population<span class="space"/></td>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Caucasian</td>
<td class="tab3tr">80.7%</td>
<td class="tab3tr">75.1%</td>
<td class="tab3tr">1.075</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>African American</td>
<td class="tab3tr">17.6%</td>
<td class="tab3tr">12.3%</td>
<td class="tab3tr">1.431</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>American Indian/Alaskan Native</td>
<td class="tab3tr">0.8%</td>
<td class="tab3tr">0.9%</td>
<td class="tab3tr">0.889</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Asian and Pacific Islander</td>
<td class="tab3tr">0.9%</td>
<td class="tab3tr">1.0%</td>
<td class="tab3tr">0.900</td>
</tr>
<tr class="td3">
<td>Hispanic/Latino</td>
<td></td>
<td class="tab3tr">12.5%<sup>a</sup> <a id="rfn3_1" href="#fn3_1"></a></td>
<td class="tab3tr">Unknown</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<aside class="ftnotetab3" epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn3_1"><a href="#rfn3_1" epub:type="backlink" role="doc-backlink" aria-label=" This link returns to its first in-text citation. "><sup>a</sup><span class="space"/>The U.S. Census notes that Hispanic or Latino people may be of any race.</a></aside>
<p class="indent">As previously noted, an important distinction between deductive and inductive reasoning is that in inductive reasoning, the chain of reasoning begins not with the assumed cause, but with the result or effect, which is already an accomplished fact. By collecting observations and bringing to bear proven principles and facts to logically assess the observations, the cause is <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_57" aria-label=" Page 57. "/>then determined. But some results or effects can be caused several ways. Not all cause-effect relationships uniquely correspond to each other.</p>
<p class="indent">Inductive reasoning does not have the same kind of mathematical certitude associated with it as does deductive reasoning. In more general terms, the problem is somewhat like the difference between a mathematical relation and a mathematical function. In a mathematical function, a specific value of x has associated with it a unique value of y. And, in reverse, there is one and only one value of y for each x. Consequently, if a particular x is known, then a specific y is known without a doubt.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, if the function is</p>
<p class="equation"><m:math display='block'><m:mrow><m:mtext>y</m:mtext><m:mo>=</m:mo><m:mn>2</m:mn><m:mtext>x</m:mtext><m:mo>+</m:mo><m:mn>6</m:mn></m:mrow></m:math></p>
<p class="noindent">then if x is 5, y must be 16; it can&#x2019; t be anything else. Likewise, if x is 100, then y must be 206, and so on.</p>
<p class="indent">In a mathematical relation, however, a particular value of x may have two or more values of y associated with it. Consequently, additional information must be supplied to determine which of the y values are extraneous and which are the solutions.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, if the relation is</p>
<p class="equation"><m:math display='block'><m:mrow> <m:mtext>y</m:mtext><m:mo>=</m:mo><m:msup><m:mrow><m:mo stretchy='false'>[</m:mo><m:mn>16</m:mn><m:mo>&#x2212;</m:mo><m:msup><m:mtext>x</m:mtext><m:mn>2</m:mn></m:msup><m:mo stretchy='false'>]</m:mo></m:mrow><m:mrow><m:mn>1</m:mn><m:mo>/</m:mo><m:mn>2</m:mn></m:mrow></m:msup></m:mrow></m:math></p>
<p class="noindent">then if x is 2, y could be either +3.464 or -3.464. Likewise, if x is -3, y could be either +2.646 or -2.646. Additional information is needed to determine whether the positive or the negative number is the solution being sought. Just knowing x in this case does not lock in the value for y. There is no unique one-to-one correspondence that works both forward and backward.</p>
<p class="indent">Inductive reasoning does not use syllogisms. It uses a series of observations combined with previous experience and logic to reach a conclusion. The following is an example:</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_58" aria-label=" Page 58. "/>Event:Thomas came to work late this morning.</p>
<p class="indent">Observation:The weather and traffic were normal this morning.</p>
<p class="indent">Observation:Thomas drives a car that is in good condition.</p>
<p class="indent">Observation:Thomas&#x2019; s clothes were wrinkled and his hair was disheveled.</p>
<p class="indent">Previous experience:Thomas is known to be prompt and is concerned</p>
<p class="indent">about having a professional appearance.</p>
<p class="indent">Conclusion: Thomas overslept this morning.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">Like cogent reasoning, there could be other reasons, perhaps less probable, why Thomas was late. Thus, the initial conclusion can be further strengthened by looking for additional evidence that supports the premise that Thomas overslept, and by also trying to disprove that he overslept, for example, by checking his car to verify he was not in a fender bender, by checking his work schedule to ensure he was not traveling all night and had to sleep at the airport, by checking toll booths to see what time he passed that point on his route, and so on.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the following inductive conclusion and the evidence upon which it is based:</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="space1">Conclusion:The 1-gallon buckets of latex paint supplied by Acme do not cover at least 800 square feet as advertised.</p>
<p class="space1">Observation A: Of the 50 buckets of Acme latex paint randomly selected from a lot of 1,012 buckets and tested by an independent laboratory under the conditions specified on the label, the average coverage was 730 square feet per bucket with a standard deviation of &#x00B1;60 square feet.</p>
<p class="space1">Observation B:Ten professional painters used Acme latex paint and found that it did not cover the 800 square feet per bucket as advertised. Their estimates of coverage were about 10% short.</p>
<p class="space1">Observation C:Five guys I know used Acme latex paint and at least four of them said they needed more paint than they thought they would when they painted the exterior of their houses.</p>
<p class="space1">Observation D:A salesman for a competitor of Acme latex paint told me that Acme exaggerates how much area one bucket of paint will cover, but that his company&#x2019; s paint actually covers 5% more than is listed on the bucket.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">All the above observations support the conclusion that a 1-gallon bucket of Acme latex paint does not cover 800 square feet as advertised. However, some observations support the conclusion better than others.</p>
<p class="indent">How much support is needed to justify a conclusion is based upon two factors: the probability that the conclusion is correct and the consequences assumed if the conclusion is not correct as compared with the consequences assumed if the conclusion is correct. In other words, the amount of evidence <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_59" aria-label=" Page 59. "/>needed for a conclusion, or decision, depends upon the risk and consequences of that conclusion or decision being wrong.</p>
<p class="indent">If a person is simply trying to economically paint his garage, either observation C or D may be sufficient for him to decide whether to purchase Acme or the competing brand. If his conclusion turns out to be wrong, the risk is simply that some extra paint will have to be bought.</p>
<p class="indent">On the other hand, if a person is suing Acme for false advertising, both A and B may be needed as well as a second report from another independent laboratory that sampled a different lot of paint.</p>
<p class="indent">In short, when using inductive reasoning, the type and degree of certitude of the evidence must be commensurate with the importance of the conclusion. Perhaps, it is somewhat like making a part in a machine shop. How close do the tolerances have to be? As close as they need to be to fit well, operate correctly, and not cost too much.</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_3">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_3">Apriorism and Aposteriorism</h2>
<p class="noindent">Apriorism is derived from the Latin prepositional phrase <i>a priori</i>, which means &#x201C;from before&#x201D; or &#x201C;from the previous.&#x201D; It is the belief that the underlying causes for observed effects are already known, or at least can be deduced from fundamental principles. Under apriorism, especially during Bacon&#x2019; s time, if a person&#x2019; s observations conflict with the accepted theory, then somehow the person&#x2019; s observations must be imperfect. They may even be the manifestation of the devil tempting a foolish mortal.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, in Friar Bacon&#x2019; s time it was assumed <i>a priori</i> that the sun revolved about the earth and that all celestial motions followed perfect circles. Thus, all other theories concerning the universe and the planets had to encompass these <i>a priori</i> assumptions.</p>
<p class="indent">This led, of course, to many inaccuracies and difficulties in accounting for the motions of the planets. Why then were these things assumed to be correct in the first place? It was because they were deemed reasonable and compatible with accepted religious dogmas. In fact, various Bible verses were cited to &#x201C;prove&#x201D; the validity of these assumptions.</p>
<p class="indent">Because holy scriptures had been invoked to prove that the earth was the center of the universe, it was then reasoned that to cast doubt upon the assumption of the earth being at the center of the universe was to cast doubt by inference upon the church itself. Because the holy scriptures and the church were deemed above reproach, the problem was considered to lie within the person who put forward such heretical ideas. In other words, if the data did not match the approved or accepted theory, the data were wrong.</p>
<p class="indent">Fortunately, we no longer literally burn people at the stake for suggesting that the sun is the center of our solar system or that planets have elliptical <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_60" aria-label=" Page 60. "/>orbits. The modern scientific method does not accept the <i>a priori</i> method of inquiry. The modern scientific method allows evidence to drive theories, rather than allowing theories to drive evidence.</p>
<p class="indent">Apriorism in disguise, however, is certainly a problem in failure analysis. Apriorism can occur when an investigator is committed to a particular theory of how the failure occurred or perhaps who committed the crime, and then sets out to prove his hypothesis. In other words, he already has decided the answer; he is merely obtaining sufficient evidence to comply with form, or regulations.</p>
<p class="indent">This is the germ of the classic &#x201C;hunch&#x201D; plot device used in some detective novels. The protagonist, the intrepid detective, spends most of the book trying to prove that his initial hunch concerning the crime is correct and that the hunch formulated by his antagonist, usually an insipid police captain who won&#x2019; t listen or a corrupt or politically ambitious district attorney, is wrong.</p>
<p class="indent">Consequently, the investigator may not investigate with an open mind and does not allow the evidence to lead him wherever it may. Evidence that may prove there was a cause different from what the investigator initially has proposed is overlooked, or not looked for at all. Evidence that is found that suggests a different cause is interpreted with special rules, usually tacitly dependent upon unproven but plausible assumptions, to make the evidence fit the preconceived cause.</p>
<p class="indent">A similar effect also occurs when the supervisor of an investigator has already made up his mind what caused the failure or who committed the crime, as in the detective novels. When a progress report is made about the investigation and the supervisor disagrees with the direction the evidence is taking the investigating team, the supervisor may direct that certain lines of inquiry that appeared otherwise fruitful be stopped or limited, and that other lines of inquiry that are not being driven by the evidence be emphasized.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps the investigation is unearthing embarrassing information, perhaps the supervisor has a political agenda and needs this investigation to reach a certain conclusion, or perhaps the supervisor has already made administrative decisions predicated on his personal theory being correct. In any case, a version of apriorism occurs when the work of otherwise competent investigators is modified and redirected to conform to the expectations of superior authority. At that point, the investigation is said to be managed to achieve the desired conclusion.</p>
<p class="indent">In this regard, there is a tale from ancient Greece that comes to mind called &#x201C;Procrustes&#x2019;  Bed.&#x201D; Procrustes was an innkeeper and a serial killer, which is an efficient combination. Procrustes would wait alongside the highway and entreat travelers to stay at his inn by telling them how comfortable the bed was and how the bed would perfectly fit the tired and footsore traveler.</p>
<p class="indent">Hidden at the head of Procrustes&#x2019;  bed was an ax, and hidden at the foot was a rack. When an unsuspecting traveler lay down and tried the bed, <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_61" aria-label=" Page 61. "/>Procrustes would seize and rob him. If the traveler were tall, Procrustes would trim off his head, feet, and ankles until he was just the right size to fit the bed. If the traveler were too short, he lengthened him on the rack until he was the right size. In this way, everyone could fit into Procrustes&#x2019;  bed. The tale says that this went on until the hero and mythical founding king of Athens, Theseus, tricked Procrustes into lying on his own bed and then turned the tables on him.</p>
<p class="indent">Apriorism is like Procrustes&#x2019;  bed. All evidence, no matter how tall or short, can be fitted comfortably into a predetermined bed if it is tortured enough.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the thornier problems for an outside investigator or consultant in the reconstruction of a failure or catastrophic event is the insidious application of <i>a priori</i> methodology by a client. This occurs when the client hires an outside expert to find out only information supportive of his particular position or theory.</p>
<p class="indent">The client will not specifically state what findings are to be made by the expert, but he may direct the investigator toward items and evidence that he knows supports the conclusion he wants, and misdirect the investigator away from evidence that might support a finding the client doesn&#x2019; t want. The client might say something like, &#x201C;No need to go through that stuff. We already looked and there is nothing there,&#x201D; or &#x201C;We already know that that doesn&#x2019; t apply.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">While the argument may seem innocent enough, and may give the appearance that the client is just trying to be efficient with the consultant&#x2019; s time, the ploy can also be used to bias the investigator&#x2019; s conclusion because only data that support the desired conclusion are being examined and all other data are being ignored. As with the previous graph analogy, if enough data points are erased or ignored, almost any curve can be fitted to the remaining data points.</p>
<p class="indent">A second version of this same <i>a priori</i> problem occurs when the client does not provide all the observational data to the investigator for evaluation. Important facts are held back, or the consultant is not given enough time or information to properly do his job. This similarly reduces the observational database and enlarges the number of plausible hypotheses, which might explain the facts.</p>
<p class="indent">A third variant of the same <i>a priori</i> reasoning is when the investigator becomes an advocate for his client. In such cases, the investigator assumes that his client&#x2019; s position is true even before he has evaluated the data. This occurs because of friendship, sympathy, or a desire to please the client in hopes of future assignments. There is nothing like giving a paying client exactly what he wants to make him happy and get more business.</p>
<p class="indent">To partially guard against this, most states require that when employed as a private consultant, licensed professional engineers can accept payment only on a time and materials basis in accordance with published rates. They <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_62" aria-label=" Page 62. "/>may not accept bonuses or contingency fees based upon how well their investigative findings please the client. This is essentially selling the engineer&#x2019; s seal. Similar conflict of interest laws and regulations sometimes apply to other state licensed professionals. While some professional groups or organizations that are not state licensed usually advocate similar ethical standards, they often do not have the legal authority, or the will, to enforce them.</p>
<p class="indent">If court or legal proceedings are involved, it is common for both of the adversarial parties to question and carefully examine experts to learn how they reached their conclusions. This is done during both pretrial activities, such as in deposition, and the trial itself in accordance with either the Federal Rules of Evidence or the particular state&#x2019; s rules of evidence.</p>
<p class="indent">During court examination by the attorneys for each party, the judge or jury can decide for themselves whether the expert is biased. During such court examinations, the terms of hire of the expert are questioned, his qualifications are examined, any unusual relationships with the client are discussed, all observations and facts he considered in reaching his conclusions are questioned, including his reasoning and analysis, and so on.</p>
<p class="indent">In the legal system, while an expert is considered a special type of witness due to his training and experience, he is not held exempt from adversarial challenges. He cannot simply spout a conclusion and presume it will be accepted at face value. It is rare for an expert&#x2019; s conclusion to go unchallenged in court.</p>
<p class="indent">To form a conclusion, the expert can examine any evidence, including some evidence that would not be admissible in court under the applicable rules of evidence. However, if the expert is using inadmissible evidence to form his opinions, he cannot divulge the inadmissible evidence to the jury or the court while explaining his opinion. An expert cannot be used in this way to get otherwise inadmissible evidence before the jury through a &#x201C;back door.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">While not perfect, this system does provide a way to check the biases and <i>a priori</i> assumptions an expert may have.</p>
<p class="indent">Opposing apriorism is aposteriorism. Aposteriorism comes from the Latin prepositional phrase <i>a posteriori,</i> which means &#x201C;from afterwards&#x201D; or &#x201C;from what comes after.&#x201D; It is the belief that the underlying cause for an event or condition is determined by critical observations of its effects, that is, by examining the facts and circumstances associated with the event or condition. Aposteriorism admits that a particular event could be caused by a variety of antecedents and that only when the facts and circumstance are examined can some potential causes be eliminated and some affirmed.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the following. There are many ways that a house can catch fire and burn down. In order to distinguish arson from an accidental cause, such as an electrical short, it is necessary to at least examine the remains of the house, determine the point of origin of the fire, interview the owner, and examine the circumstances associated with the fire. By doing this, some <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_63" aria-label=" Page 63. "/>ways in which the house may have caught fire can be eliminated, and some can be affirmed.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, if shorting occurred to cause the fire, wiring that exhibits primary shorting should be present at the point of origin in places consistent with shorting, for example, old wiring or substandard connections. Arson indicators should be absent from the point of origin.</p>
<p class="indent">On the other hand, if an arson were committed, the telltale signs of arson occurring first should be present, such as the remains of an accelerant at the point of origin, ignition energy being mysteriously available where none was known to exist, a timer present at the point of origin, and so on. Accidental fire ignition indicators should be absent or secondary around the point of origin.</p>
<p class="indent">If enough evidence is available and gathered, and the analysis of the evidence is sound, the way in which the fire actually did occur can be separated with certainty from the ways in which the fire could have occurred but didn&#x2019; t. The only way to find this evidence, however, is to diligently look for it. In this regard, there is no substitute for fieldwork, that is, evidence gathering.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the telltale signs of implicit apriorism is a small amount of fieldwork, coupled with a large amount of armchair theorizing and analysis. Likewise, one of the telltale signs of aposteriorism is a lot of fieldwork, coupled with a small amount of analysis. <i>Very little analysis is needed when a chorus of converging facts speak for themselves.</i></p>
<p class="indent">With respect to initiating an investigation and avoiding <i>a priori</i> biases, perhaps the best advice is that given by the character Siddhartha to his friend Govida in the book <i>Siddhartha</i> by Hermann Hesse.</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="quote">When someone is seeking, said Siddhartha, it happens quite easily that he only sees the thing that he is seeking; that he is unable to find anything, unable to absorb anything, because he is only thinking of the thing he is seeking, because he has a goal; but finding means: to be free, to be receptive, to have no goal. You, o worthy one, are perhaps indeed a seeker, for in striving towards your goal, you do not see many things that are under your nose. <i>(Siddhartha, </i>Hermann Hesse, MJF Books, 1951)</p>
</blockquote>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_4">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_4">Sophistry</h2>
<p class="noindent">In ancient Athens in the fifth century B.C., sophists were teachers of philosophy who provided instruction about debate and rhetoric. Rhetoric is the art of speaking effectively and persuasively. It is a combination of argumentation tactics, logic, presentation, enunciation, cadence, delivery style, and vocabulary. Due to the importance of public speaking then, especially with its application to Athenian politics and law, rhetoric was an important part of Greek education.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_64" aria-label=" Page 64. "/>Sophistry in the modern sense of the word, however, is argumentation whose point is to win over an audience by any means. This can be done by appealing to the audience&#x2019; s emotions, their traditions, their local sense of what is plausible, any religious or philosophical beliefs held by the audience, or any underlying prejudices or biases that they hold dear.</p>
<p class="indent">Sophistry does not require the use of logic, proven scientific methods and principles, or verifiable facts. However, some verifiable facts or scientific principles are often interwoven into a sophist argument to make it appear credible and scientific. In well-crafted sophistry, especially during the give and take of debate, an illogical or irrational assumption buried unobtrusively in the sophist&#x2019; s argument may be difficult to spot quickly. This may allow the sophist enough time to win over the audience and win the argument before the other side can detect the logical flaw.</p>
<p class="indent">Because of this, some dictionaries define sophistry in the modern sense as a deliberately invalid argument that is ingeniously put together to persuade or convince an audience of some issue.</p>
<p class="indent">Sophistry is effective when the &#x201C;truth&#x201D; of an argument is decided by an audience at a specific time. Sophistry is ineffective when it is subject to expert peer review; scientific standards, tests, and experimentation; or logical scrutiny applied over an indeterminate period of time. If the audience agrees with the argument when the time for decision making occurs, then the argument becomes true.</p>
<p class="indent">Consequently, sophists point out that the &#x201C;real&#x201D; validity of an argument or the &#x201C;actual&#x201D; truthfulness of an argument is unimportant. What is important is winning over the audience. Sophists believe that the audience defines what the truth is. In essence, sophists believe in a relative truth or perceived truth rather than an absolute truth. The truth of a sophist&#x2019; s argument does not have to be consistent with the physical laws of nature or verified facts. It just has to be believed by the audience.</p>
<p class="indent">So what does sophistry have to do with failure investigations?</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the fact that juries decide whether a particular failure was an accident, a deliberate act, or a crime. Juries decide who is at fault or not at fault in a lawsuit. Juries decide what is good medical practice or quackery. Juries decide who is guilty or innocent in a criminal trial. To an extreme, if an attorney can convince a jury of twelve men and women that the moon is made of green cheese, then legally the moon is made of green cheese: case closed.</p>
<p class="indent">Likewise, when industrial failures occur, the management of a company ultimately decides whether a certain root cause finding is acceptable and how it will be corrected. Like juries, managers and management groups have emotions, prejudices, and biases to which a consultant or investigative group can appeal, or perhaps pander. Consequently, the findings of some investigations are much easier for management to accept than others.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_65" aria-label=" Page 65. "/>Some company management teams, for example, are much more likely to accept the findings of an investigation if they can easily afford the recommended corrective actions, and no one in the management team is found to have either directly or indirectly caused the failure.</p>
<p class="indent">On the other hand, investigators who have to present a report that discusses a failure that was the direct result of a management decision or blunder, especially by a specific manager who sits in judgment of the final report, may have a harder time of it. Further, it becomes even harder for the investigator when the necessary corrective action is expensive, is embarrassing, or has undesirable legal consequences.</p>
<p class="indent">With respect to crimes, given exactly the same evidence, arguments, and circumstances, a jury chosen from city dwellers might acquit a defendant while another jury composed of farmers might convict, and vice versa. Thus, if the psychological profile of a jury panel is understood, a more convincing argument can be crafted to fit the evidence and the jury&#x2019; s predilections.</p>
<p class="indent">This is why jury pool psychologists have become important in highprofile cases. Given sufficient data concerning the background of a specific jury panel and the arguments and counterarguments that will be proffered, a jury pool psychologist can assess the probability that a case will be won even before the trial takes place.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, suppose there is a trial and the physical evidence clearly indicates that Mr. Smith is a thief. His fingerprints were found on the merchandise, he was seen by several witnesses carrying away the goods, the stolen goods were found in the trunk of his car, he has no explanation of why he had stolen goods in his car, he has no alibi for the time when the crime was committed, and he confessed to the crime when initially apprehended. If Mr. Smith&#x2019; s advocate, however, convinces the jury, by any means, that Mr. Smith is innocent and the jury acquits him, Mr. Smith is indeed innocent in the eyes of the law.</p>
<p class="indent">Likewise, suppose the prosecution is able to convince the jury that a Mr. Jones committed a crime, despite the fact that there is no scientific evidence linking him to the crime, that there are logical inconsistencies and misinterpretations of the physical evidence, and that the defendant has a reasonable alibi. If the jury convicts Mr. Jones on circumstantial evidence that could have equally applied to dozens of other people, he indeed is guilty in the eyes of the law despite the lack of scientific and logical rigor.</p>
<p class="indent">In that case, Mr. Jones&#x2019; s only recourse is to appeal the jury&#x2019; s decision to a higher court. If he receives a hearing in the higher court, he will have to trust that the higher court will not be as easily swayed by emotional arguments and will give greater credence to sound logic. Unfortunately, appeals are usually based upon procedural issues rather than logical or scientific ones.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_66" aria-label=" Page 66. "/>As noted previously in this chapter, this is exactly what occurred to a number of people who were scheduled to be executed in Illinois. They were convicted unanimously by a jury of their peers, and their appeals had been duly considered and denied. Fortunately, their lives were spared by the convincing nature of DNA identification evidence.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the argumentation techniques used in sophistry is an unclear definition of the subject matter, i.e., using unclear descriptive vocabulary when talking about a particular subject. Taking advantage of this, an advocate can address two different aspects of a topic at the same time. The audience members can then pick and chose what they wish to hear depending upon each person&#x2019; s personal prejudices.</p>
<p class="indent">Another technique is to play upon semantics, that is, to apply shades of meaning not normally intended for a word or phrase, and then to make it mean something useful for your argument and detrimental to your opponent&#x2019; s. Here is an example:</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="indent">Many states have loans and scholarships for poor students</p> 
<p class="indent">Jim&#x2019; s grade point average is barely above a D.</p>
<p class="indent">Fred&#x2019; s grade point average is an A+.</p>
<p class="indent">Jim is qualified than Fred for a loan or scholarship because he is a poor student.</p>
</section>
<p class="indent">Here is another example of sophistry. Suppose an attorney, Mr. Charles, makes many specious legal motions during a trial that he knows will be denied, but he makes them anyway. Over and over he tries the court&#x2019; s patience as he objects to evidence or proceedings that the judge denies. Finally, on a particular point of law that is extremely important to his case, Mr. Charles makes one more objection.</p>
<p class="indent">In a sidebar, Mr. Charles tells the judge that the judge is obviously prejudiced against him since the court record will clearly show that the judge has denied 100% of all his motions, while the judge has ruled in favor of his opponent 100% of the time. Mr. Charles will then feign exasperation, accuse the judge of bias against him and his client, and plead for a scrap of fairness from the judge. To prove it, the judge should certainly grant Mr. Charles at least this one motion.</p>
<p class="indent">The question is then: Will the judge recall on the spot that all the motions put forward by the other attorney were well grounded and deserved being granted while the motions put forward by Mr. Charles were not? Will the judge be swayed by the apparent percentage figures cited to &#x201C;prove&#x201D; that the judge has been unfair? Will the judge promptly recognize the false assumption underlying the argument by Mr. Charles that &#x201C;fairness&#x201D; means having an equal number of motions granted to both sides?</p>
<p class="indent">Will the judge further think about how this fairness issue will look to members of the press, who are watching in the back of the courtroom and seem to be <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_67" aria-label=" Page 67. "/>pulling for Mr. Charles? Will the judge interpret the looks of consternation on the faces of the jurors to mean that he does appear to them to have been unfair?</p>
<p class="indent">Or, will the judge consider only the legal merits of the issue under discussion at the moment? If his thinking about the issue, pro and con, was evenhanded before the sidebar and his observation of the jury and the press, will any of these other factors be the slight nudge that pushes his decision one way or the other?</p>
<p class="indent">This is one of the insidious facets of sophistry that make it a useful tool for an advocate. When the evidence is nearly equal on either side of an argument, when a decision has to be made, and when there is pressure to promptly make the decision, often the underlying deciding factor is an unspoken, illogical, emotional one. It may be a factor that makes the decider emotionally comfortable with the decision.</p>
<p class="indent">The following are some general characteristics of sophistry:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">Ambiguity and equivocation. This occurs when the usual meanings of words and terms are disregarded and unusual definitions and tortured meanings are substituted. Example: <i>Amputation</i> and <i>divorce </i>are both terms that describe separating and dividing, but a person cannot seek compensation for a divorce through insurance plans that pay for amputation of limbs.</li>
<li class="dotch01">Nullification. This is where a line of reasoning is attacked by asserting something else is true that cannot be proven or is simply argumentative. Example: &#x201C;Mr. Jones, is it possible you could be wrong?&#x201D; or &#x201C;Isn&#x2019; t it true, Mr. Jones, that if this were all a dream, your argument would mean nothing?&#x201D; or &#x201C;Could it be true, Mr. Jones, that the devil is making you say these bad things about my client?&#x201D; or &#x201C;Ten years ago one of your laboratory tech employees was convicted of a felony, so any testing from your laboratory cannot be trusted.&#x201D;</li>
<li class="dotch01">Substitution of arbitrary rules for judgment and context. This occurs when the sophist demands that certain rules that he puts forward be held absolute and inviolate despite the circumstances or conditions.</li>
<li class="dotch01"><i>A priori</i> criteria for evidence. This is where the sophist requires that all evidence that will be presented or discovered in the future must be weighed and evaluated according to rules that the sophist decides should apply. Consequently, any evidence that does not fit the rules the sophist has established should not be considered. I trust that the reader will recall the story of Procrustes&#x2019;  bed.</li>
<li class="dotch01"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_68" aria-label=" Page 68. "/>Shifting of the burden of proof. This occurs when the sophist demands that every hypothesis the sophist proposes be disproved by the other side, and if the other side cannot do so convincingly, then the hypothesis is automatically true. In other words, &#x201C;If you can&#x2019; t prove me wrong, I must be right.&#x201D; Or when the sophist attempts to transfer the burden of proof of an argument that is normally presumed by one side, to the other side. For example, a person is usually presumed to be innocent until proven guilty. A sophist might turn the argument so that the person is presumed guilty until proven innocent.</li>
<li class="dotch01">Requiring unreasonable amounts of ironclad proof. This is where the burden of proof requirement is so extreme, no amount of evidence of any kind can prove the issue to the satisfaction of the sophist. Consider the following exaggerated line of questioning involving an armed bank robbery:</li>
</ul>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate:</i> Did my client have a gun?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:Yes.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Do you know what kind?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:No, not specifically. It might have been a 0.44 Colt automatic.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Was it loaded?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:I don&#x2019; t know for sure.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Are you familiar with guns?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness:</i> Yes. In the military I earned a sharpshooter&#x2019; s medal for automatic handguns.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Are you a certified handgun identification expert?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:No, I am not such an expert.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Could it have been a metal toy gun that looked authentic?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:I suppose it could have been a very good replica.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Did you try to determine if it was a replica?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>: No. He pointed it at me and told me he&#x2019; d blow my brains out if I moved.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate:</i> Did you ask him if it was a replica gun?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:No. I didn&#x2019; t think it was a good idea at the time to engage in conversation concerning his potential collection of replica guns.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Did you think he meant it when he said he would blow your brains out?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:Yes.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Are you a licensed psychologist and were you able to render an on-the-spot professional opinion that he meant it without a previous psychological interview?</p>
<p class="witness"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_69" aria-label=" Page 69. "/><i>Witness</i>:No, I&#x2019; m a bank teller, not a shrink.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:So, since you are not a certified gun identification expert, and since you didn&#x2019; t ask him if it was a replica, and since you are not a licensed psychologist and could not professionally assess his state of mind as to whether he would really kill you or was just joking with a replica gun, what other proof do you have that my client was allegedly threatening you?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:None.</p>
<section class="secmmc03">
<p class="space12">A similar argument might be used in a liability case. It would go like this:</p>
</section>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:Of course.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Are you aware that people are sometimes killed in the cars your company manufactures?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:Yes.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:Don&#x2019; t you think it would be a good thing to spend as much money as it takes on safety until no one is ever killed in any of the cars you manufacture?</p>
<p class="witness"><i>Witness</i>:We certainly spend a lot of money on safety research and are doing our best to make them as safe as possible.</p>
<p class="advocate"><i>Advocate</i>:But people are still being killed in your cars. Your company obviously is not doing a good job and is not spending enough.</p>
<ul>
<li class="dotch01">Judgment by secret criteria. This occurs when the sophist sets himself up as a judge or self-appointed critic, and then states something like, &#x201C;Do you expect rational people like me to actually believe you?&#x201D; The inference is that the argument is illogical and that the sophist is an objective judge as to whether the evidence is believable.</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_5">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_5">The Method of Exhaustion</h2>
<p class="noindent">The method of exhaustion, sometimes called the process of elimination, attempts to determine the cause of a failure or event by proving what did not cause the failure or event. When all the possible ways in which the event or failure could have occurred are eliminated until there is only one possibility left, the remaining possibility is presumed to be the cause.</p>
<p class="indent">Logically, it works something like this. Suppose event Z can only be caused by one of six possible causes acting alone: causes A, B, C, D, E, or F.</p>
<p class="noindent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_70" aria-label=" Page 70. "/>Suppose then that there is evidence that verifies that causes B, C, D, E, and F could not have been involved. Then without having to find evidence to support cause A, cause A is presumed to have caused event Z by the process of elimination. In sum, since there are only six possibilities, and because five of them are eliminated by the evidence, the single remaining cause must be the one that caused event Z, even though no direct evidence was found to support it.</p>
<p class="indent">The method is summed up nicely in a quotation by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle&#x2019; s character Sherlock Holmes:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="quote">When you have ruled out the impossible, whatever is left, no matter how improbable, must be true.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="indent">In theory, the above sounds like a good plan, especially when it is easier to disprove, that is, falsify, all the alternative hypotheses than it is to find evidence to support (along with evidence that fails to falsify) the remaining hypothesis. The method of exhaustion, however, only works well when all of the possible modes of failure have actually been accounted for in an exhaustive list. If the list is not truly exhaustive, the method is significantly flawed.</p>
<p class="indent">In the previous example it was assumed that event Z could be caused only by one of six causes acting alone: A, B, C, D, E, or F. However, what if one potential cause was not included in the list? In that case, if causes B, C, D, E, and F were all eliminated, this would still leave two possible causes: cause A and the unknown cause. On the face of it, this means that this application of the process of elimination might only produce an answer that has a 50% chance of being correct.</p>
<p class="indent">Further, while causes B, C, D, E, and F may have all been eliminated by the evidence that they acted individually to cause event Z, what if causes B and E can act in concert to cause effect Z, or perhaps C, D, and F all acting in concert? The evidence only eliminated B, C, D, E, and F acting individually.</p>
<p class="indent">In the Michelson-Morley experiment, which was discussed in a previous section, aether must exist, scientists of the time argued, because there was just no other way to account for the transmission of light through empty space. As it turned out, however, the assumption was false. There was indeed another way to account for the transmission of light through empty space: a previously unknown phenomenon involving the propagation of electromagnetic waves. Speaking rhetorically, the scientists who argued for aether on the basis of &#x201C;it can&#x2019; t be anything else&#x201D; did not know what they did not know. They presumed that light must act only in ways that they already understood.</p>
<p class="indent">Consequently, the process of elimination sometimes suffers from the fact that when the list of all possible failure modes is prepared, an item may be inadvertently left off the list. Perhaps no one knows about it, or assumptions <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_71" aria-label=" Page 71. "/>tacitly made in the preparation of the list inadvertently overlooked important sets of possible failure modes.</p>
<p class="indent">In arguments where sophistry is used to sway an audience, an advocate may deliberately omit a potential failure mode from the supposed exhaustive list of failure modes, hoping that no one will notice the omission. The advocate will then eliminate by <i>bona fide</i> evidence all the items on the list but one, the one he wants to be the cause. Without furnishing any further evidence to support or falsify the one remaining item, the advocate will then conclude by the process of elimination that the remaining item must be the actual cause.</p>
<p class="indent">Thus, not only does the advocate deflect scrutiny from the cause he wishes to defend, the one omitted from the list, but he misdirects focus to another cause using an apparently plausible logical argument. This requires the defender to not only furnish the evidence to dismiss the item the advocate concluded was the cause, but also to detect what has been omitted from the list and then find evidence to implicate the omitted item as the actual cause.</p>
<p class="indent">This tactic often confuses the audience, who now must weigh and assess three lines of evidence: (1) the process of elimination evidence presented by the advocate, (2) the evidence explaining why the process of elimination logic presented by the advocate is incorrect, and (3) the evidence that supports and verifies the actual cause of the event.</p>
<p class="indent">In several of her more famous detective novels, Agatha Christie used the process of elimination logic as a red herring to fool the reader. In one novel, the reader was led to tacitly assume that there was only one murderer, when in fact there were several murderers. The reader was led to assume that if evidence implicated A, the same evidence eliminated B. In another, the murderer actually killed himself early in the story and contrived that others would die after his death. Using the process of elimination, the reader assumed that the murderer would be the person to die last. In a third story, the murderer was the person narrating the story who assisted in the investigation. Again, the reader was led to assume that the real murderer would not honestly assist in providing evidence that would eventually implicate himself.</p>
<p class="indent">Because of these pitfalls, the method of exhaustion should be used with great caution and care. Even if there is evidence to conclusively eliminate all but one item on the list, it is good practice to not just accept the logical conclusion. An honest effort to find evidence to support or falsify the remaining item on the list should still be done.</p>
<p class="indent">Some investigators include an unknown cause in the list of possibilities and will attempt to find evidence to support or falsify the unknown cause just like any other possibility. If such an approach had been used with the Michelson-Morley experiment, the null results would have indicated right away that a very important but previously unknown phenomenon existed that they hadn&#x2019; t considered.</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_6">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_6"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_72" aria-label=" Page 72. "/>Coincidence, Correlation, and Causation</h2>
<p class="noindent">Sometimes two events occur closely in time such that the first event is presumed, somehow, to have been the cause of the second event. In other words, because event B happened right after event A occurred, it is presumed that event A somehow caused event B. A cause-and-effect relationship does characteristically have an ordered time sequence. However, the converse of this is not necessarily true. An apparent ordered time sequence, that is, coincidence, is not sufficient by itself to prove that a cause-and-effect relationship exists.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, suppose a baseball player has a drink of a particular type of soft drink just before he hits a home run. A week later, he has another drink of the same soft drink and hits another home run. He concludes from these two, separate sequenced events that this is his lucky soft drink. To ensure future success in hitting home runs, he then lays in a few cases of the stuff and drinks it liberally before batting.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite appearances, coincidence is fundamentally a random effect that involves independently occurring events. If A occurs, B may or may not occur right after A, and vice versa. Because A and B are independent events, A has no cause-and-effect connection to B. Probability dictates, however, that occasionally when A occurs, B will occur closely afterwards.</p>
<p class="indent">People will sometimes argue that coincidental events must be related in a cause-and-effect relationship by noting how improbable the coincidence is. Thus, the argument goes, there must be a cause-effect relationship because the two events occurring in sequence are simply too improbable to occur by mere coincidence.</p>
<p class="indent">This argument is great fodder for the previous section on sophistry.</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the law of large numbers, however, and how it applies to coincidences. The law of large numbers states that even if something has an extremely low probability of occurrence at any given time, given a sufficiently large number of occurrences in which the event could occur, all things that are possible will eventually occur. The only things that will not occur, given sufficient time and opportunity, are those things that are genuinely impossible.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, let&#x2019; s say that the chance of a particular coincidence occurring to a person is one in a million. Since there are about 300 million people in the United States, then on the face of it a one-in-a-million event will happen to 300 people in the United States. Likewise, since there are about 6 billion people in the world, a one-in-a-million coincidence will happen to 6,000 people in the world.</p>
<p class="indent">Likewise, the chance of winning the top prize in a state lottery is perhaps 1 in 10,000,000. The odds are low for a specific person to win the lottery, of course, but this doesn&#x2019; t mean that winning doesn&#x2019; t happen. In fact, someone wins the lottery nearly every week.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_73" aria-label=" Page 73. "/>Consequently, the fact that an event, or sequence of events, has a low probability of occurrence is not <i>prime facia</i> evidence that it is not a coincidence. Low-probability events occur unnoticed around us all the time because thousands, if not millions, of events happen around us every day. Further, many supposedly low-probability coincidences even occur in clusters. Some people, for example, have won a state lottery more than once. Winning one lottery does not exclude a person from winning other lotteries. As long as a person buys a ticket, his chances in the second lottery are the same as those of everyone else who buys a ticket.</p>
<p class="indent">To demonstrate that something is not just a coincidence, a verifiable causal link must be found between the two events. The burden of proof is to show that the two events are not a coincidence, not vice versa. Consequently, the first event must be shown to set up, or put into motion, events or conditions that logically allow, encourage, or make the second event occur.</p>
<p class="indent">The next step from simple coincidence is correlation. Correlation is when some kind of demonstrable relationship does exist between two events. When event A occurs, event B seems to also occur with some regularity. In fact, the correlation between A and B may provide predictive usefulness that can be tested and is repeatable.</p>
<p class="indent">Correlations may, indeed, indicate that there is a direct cause-and-effect relationship between two events. However, they may also indicate that the two events simply share a common factor. For example, a great increase in the number of traffic accidents in a single day usually correlates well with the number of collapses of agricultural outbuildings in the following 24-hour period. However, car accidents do not cause outbuildings to collapse on their own. The common factor is wet, heavy snow.</p>
<p class="indent">A heavy snow usually makes driving conditions hazardous. A higher than normal number of accidents then usually results on a day when a significant snowfall occurs. Agricultural outbuildings are not built to the same code standards as buildings occupied by people, and some are old and rickety. Consequently, roof collapses occur more frequently in agricultural outbuildings the day after a heavy snow.</p>
<p class="indent">One of my favorite correlations is between air conditioner failures and pregnancies. While one obviously does not cause the other, what they have in common is power outages. Low voltage, voltage fluctuations, and blackouts cause air conditioner compressor motors and control equipment to fail at a higher rate. Likewise, the same power trips, outages, and blackouts that leave people in the dark promote cuddling. In turn, the increase in cuddling results in a higher than normal number of births 9 months after the event. The New York blackouts that occurred variously on August 17, 1959, June 13, 1961, November 9, 1965 (the big one), July 13, 1977, and most recently August 15, 2003, all attest to this amusing correlation.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_74" aria-label=" Page 74. "/>Unfortunately, coincidence and correlation are often mistaken for causation. This is sometimes called the <i>post hoc ergo propter hoc</i> fallacy. The Latin phrase literally means &#x201C;after this therefore because of this.&#x201D; Because event, action, or condition B occurs after A, event, action, or condition A is presumed to have caused B.</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_7">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_7">Applying the Scientific Method to Determine a Root Cause</h2>
<p class="noindent">In a laboratory setting, it is usual to design experiments where the variable being studied is not obscured or complicated by other effects acting simultaneously. The variable is singled out to be free from other influences. Various experiments are then conducted to determine what occurs when the variable is changed. Numerous tests of the effects of changing the variable provide a statistical basis for concluding how the variable works, and predicting what will occur under other circumstances.</p>
<p class="indent">In this way, theoretically, any accident, failure, crime, or catastrophic event could be experimentally duplicated or reconstructed. The variables would simply be changed and combined until the right combination is found that faithfully reconstructs the event. When the actual event is experimentally duplicated, it might be said that the reconstruction of the failure event has been solved.</p>
<p class="indent">There are problems with this approach, however. Foremost is the fact that many accidents and failures are singular events. From considerations of cost, time, logistics, and safety, the event cannot be repeated over and over in different ways just so some engineer can play with the variables and make measurements until the outcome perfectly matches the event being assessed.</p>
<p class="indent">It can be argued, however, that if there is a large body of observational evidence and facts about a particular accident or failure, this is a suitable substitute for direct experimental data. The premise is that only the correct reconstruction hypothesis will account for all of the observations, and also be consistent with accepted scientific laws and knowledge.</p>
<p class="indent">An analogous example is the determination of an algebraic equation from a plot of points on a Cartesian plane. The more data points there are on the graph, the better the curve fit will be. Inductively, a large number of data points with excellent correspondence to a certain curve or equation would be proof that the fitted curve was equal to the original function that generated the data.</p>
<p class="indent">Thus, the scientific method, as it is applied to the reconstruction of accidents and failures, is as follows:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">A general working hypothesis is proposed based upon &#x201C;first cut&#x201D; verified information.</li>
<li class="dotch01"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_75" aria-label=" Page 75. "/>As more information is gathered, the original working hypothesis is modified to encompass the growing body of observations.</li>
<li class="dotch01">After a certain time, the working hypothesis could be tested by using it to predict the presence of evidence that may have not been obvious or was overlooked during the initial information gathering effort.</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">A hypothesis is considered a complete reconstruction when the following are satisfied:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01">The hypothesis accounts for all the verified observations.</li>
<li class="dotch01">When possible, the hypothesis accurately predicts the existence of additional evidence not previously known.</li>
<li class="dotch01">The hypothesis is consistent with accepted scientific principles, knowledge, and methodologies.</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">The scientific method, as noted above, is not without some shortcomings. The reality of some types of failures and accidents is that the event itself may destroy evidence about itself. The fatigue fracture that may have caused a drive shaft to fail, for example, may be rubbed away by friction with another part after the failure has occurred. Because of this, the fatigue fracture itself may not be directly observable. Or perhaps the defective part responsible for the failure is lost or obscured from discovery in the accident debris. Cleanup or emergency repair activities may also inadvertently destroy or obscure important evidence. In short, there can be observational gaps.</p>
<p class="indent">Using the previous graph analogy, this is like having areas of the graph with no data points, or few data points. Of course, if the data points are too few, perhaps several curves might be fitted to the available data. For example, two points determine not only a simple line, but also an infinite number of polynomial curves and transcendental functions.</p>
<p class="indent">Thus, it is possible that the available observations can be explained by several hypotheses. Gaps or paucity in the observational data may not allow a unique solution. For this reason, two qualified and otherwise forthright experts can sometimes proffer two conflicting reconstruction hypotheses, both equally consistent with the available data.</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_8">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_8">The Scientific Method and the Legal System</h2>
<p class="noindent">Having several plausible explanations for an accident or failure may not necessarily be a disadvantage in our legal system. It can sometimes happen that an investigator does not have to know exactly what happened, but rather what did not happen.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_76" aria-label=" Page 76. "/>In our adversarial legal system, one person or party is the accuser, prosecutor or plaintiff, and the other is the accused, or defendant. The plaintiff or prosecutor is required to prove that the defendant has done some wrong to him, his client, or the state. However, the defendant has merely to prove that he, himself, did not do the wrong nor has a part in it; he does not have to prove who else or what else did the wrong, although it often is advantageous for him to do so.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, suppose that a gas range company is being sued for a design defect that allegedly caused a house to burn down. As far as the gas range company is concerned, as long as it can prove that the range did not cause the fire, the gas range company likely has no further concern as to what did cause the fire. (&#x201D;We don&#x2019; t know what caused the fire, but it wasn&#x2019; t our gas range that did it.&#x201D;) Likewise, if the plaintiffs cannot prove that the particular gas range caused the fire, they also may quickly lose interest in litigation. This is because there may be no one else for the plaintiffs to sue; there is insufficient evidence to identify any other specific causation.</p>
<p class="indent">Likewise, suppose that a crime has been committed and a person, a defendant, has been charged with the crime. If the defendant can simply prove that he did not do it or that it was not possible for him to have done it, that is sufficient. The defendant does not have to prove who actually committed the crime; he only has to prove that he did not do it.</p>
<p class="indent">Thus, even if the observational data are not sufficient to provide a unique reconstruction of the failure or crime, it may be sufficient to deny a particular one. That may be all that is needed.</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_9">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_9">Convergence of Independent Methods</h2>
<p class="noindent">The veracity of a scenario can be reinforced greatly if several independent methods are simultaneously used to reach the same conclusion.</p>
<p class="indent">For example, trajectory calculations that use physical evidence in combination with the known ballistic characteristics of the bullet and gun may show that some shots that were fired came from a certain location. Witnesses that heard the shots may further corroborate this finding by providing sound vectors that intersect in the area that coincides with the calculation. Examination of the area in question may find closely grouped bullet casings on the ground that match the bullet and the number of shots that were heard. Lastly, a witness may have observed someone shooting from the spot in question at the correct time.</p>
<p class="indent">Each of the above lines of evidence is wholly independent of the others, but each produces the same conclusion about the location of the shot. Some of them help support each other. Thus, the conclusion in the example about where the shots originated is not based upon just one line of inquiry, but several independent lines of inquiry. Each additional line of independent <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_77" aria-label=" Page 77. "/>inquiry that logically supports or is consistent with the same conclusion further improves the probability of the veracity of the conclusion.</p>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec3_10">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec3_10">Occam&#x2019; s Razor</h2>
<p class="noindent">William of Occam was a medieval Franciscan monk and philosopher. He lived from 1285 to 1349 and studied theology at Oxford. Friar Occam would have received his master&#x2019; s degree from Oxford, but was denied the degree because the faculty, specifically the chancellor at the time, Jogh Lutterell, objected to some of William&#x2019; s ideas concerning apostolic poverty.</p>
<p class="indent">Being a Franciscan monk, William believed in living life as simply as possible. However, as occurred to many independent thinkers in those times, he ran afoul of church policy. Consequently, William was summoned to the papal court in 1327, which was then in Avignon, France. Charges had been brought against William by his old nemesis, Mr. Lutterell, again concerning his views on apostolic poverty. The chancellor was apparently still very steamed about William&#x2019; s opinions and wouldn&#x2019; t let go of the issue.</p>
<p class="indent">As an aside, I challenge the reader to research what this burning fourteenth-century issue, apostolic poverty, was all about. I use the word <i>burning </i>advisedly, because that was the usual punishment then for expressing a nonchurch-sanctioned opinion. Apparently, William&#x2019; s opinion about the matter was so dangerous to the civilized world that Mr. Lutterell was quite willing to ruin William&#x2019; s career and possibly even put him to death.</p>
<p class="indent">As the pope was about to issue a condemnation in 1328, Occam and two other Franciscans fled to the protection of Emperor Louis IV in Munich. William was eventually excommunicated from the church. However, not to be outdone, William authored a treatise that concluded Pope John XXII was a heretic.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite this relatively interesting life for a monk, Occam is chiefly remembered in the expression &#x201C;Occam&#x2019; s razor.&#x201D; Occam&#x2019; s razor is not a principle or a law. It is a guide or rule of thumb. Sometimes called the principle of parsimony, or the principle of simplicity, in the original Latin writing, William of Occam wrote: <i>Pluralitas non estponenda sine neccesitate.</i> Translated literally, this means: &#x201C;plurality should not be put forward without necessity.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">This means that when there are two or more scenarios that explain how an event may have occurred, the simplest scenario that fits the facts is usually the one that is correct. A more modern and succinct equivalent expression is: keep it simple, stupid. With respect to failure analysis, a person who applies Occam&#x2019; s razor:</p>
<ul class="ul">
<li class="dotch01"> Cuts away redundant or unnecessary steps in the scenario hypothesis that cannot be proven or disproven</li>
<li class="dotch01"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_78" aria-label=" Page 78. "/>Includes only those steps physically necessary to affect change from the initial condition to the final condition</li>
<li class="dotch01">Uses the minimum number of steps to accomplish the change</li>
<li class="dotch01"> Leaves standing in the scenario only those steps that are consistent with the facts and proven science</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">The last point is sometimes called the coherence theory of truth. This theory asserts that a statement or scenario can be true only if it is logically consistent with other proven scientific theories and verifiable facts. A statement or scenario, therefore, cannot be true if it contradicts or is inconsistent with proven science or verifiable facts. As with Occam&#x2019; s razor, the coherence theory of truth is more of a guideline or rule of thumb. It seems to work most of the time but is not foolproof.</p>
<p class="indent">Here is an exaggerated example of the application of Occam&#x2019; s razor. One person might note that hot dogs can be cooked nicely over a charcoal fire. His explanation for how this occurs is that the coals glow and give off smoke. The smoke rises to the heavens. A god smells the smoke, which smells like a sacrifice. The god is pleased by the sacrifice and causes the hot dogs to be cooked. By applying Occam&#x2019; s razor, however, the scenario is much simplified: hot dogs placed over glowing hot coals become cooked. The imagined steps involving a god being pleased are not testable, provable, or needed to affect the change and, therefore, are deleted.</p>
<p class="indent">The fact that Occam&#x2019; s razor is a guideline does not mean that it does not have any scientific foundation. It does. Occam&#x2019; s razor is a disguised way of stating Le Chatelier&#x2019; s principle, the principle of least action, the principle that water flows in the direction of the steepest gradient, the principle that electricity follows the path of least resistance, the principle of diminishing returns, the second law of thermodynamics, Pareto&#x2019; s principle, and several other similar laws and principles.</p>
<p class="indent">By the way, Occam did not discover or invent the guideline himself. It was already a common logical device used in medieval philosophical argument. Occam, however, did use the logical device frequently in his writings. For that reason, the principle became associated with him.</p>
<p class="indent">Here is another way that Occam&#x2019; s razor can be applied. In accident or failure cases where there is no human intervention during the failure sequence of events, events unfold in a logical, step-by-step fashion. Each step will be a logical consequence of the conditions and actions existing in the preceding step. When sufficiently accurate information is available that describes the conditions and events in step 1, the application of scientific principles and methods allows a person to anticipate and predict the conditions and events that will then exist in step 2, and then likewise in step 3, step 4, and so on. Without interference, naturally occurring events follow the rules of nature.</p>
<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_79" aria-label=" Page 79. "/>However, when there is human intervention in the scenario, often at least one step in the sequence does not proceed logically from the preceding step. The events may proceed logically from the initial condition to the point of human intervention, and then proceed logically after the point of human intervention to the final condition. At the point of human intervention, however, the apparent human-controlled action is illogical or out of sequence; that is, it is inconsistent with naturally occurring events in a closed system.</p>
<p class="indent">In arson, for example, by definition the arsonist arranges how, when, and where the fire occurs. While he may try to make the arrangement appear natural, conceal his handiwork so that it won&#x2019; t be discovered, or perhaps discretely &#x201C;help&#x201D; conditions already present that are conducive for a fire, the arsonist supplies the missing ingredient that heretofore had prevented the fire from occurring spontaneously.</p>
<p class="indent">In working backwards through the fire timeline evidence, from final condition to initial condition, a person may find that the failure sequence, that is, the fire in this case, is logical and orderly until a particular unnatural step is reached. The unnatural step is likely the point where human intervention occurred to direct, magnify, or initiate the fire. At that point, Occam&#x2019; s razor can be applied to hypothesize the simplest, easiest action that accounts for the unnatural step.</p>
<p class="indent">With respect to the above, a physicist or engineer would say that natural events proceed according to the principle of least energy. That is, nature favors the most energy-efficient path between two points, conditions, or states. Similarly, a chemist would say that events proceed according to La Chatelier&#x2019; s principle, a variant of the principle of least energy. Further, when events occur spontaneously, a chemist would say that the change in Gibb&#x2019; s free energy for the system is less than zero or that the system&#x2019; s entropy has increased.</p>
<p class="indent">Consequently, when an event or a series of connected events do not follow a course consistent with the principle of least energy or its corollaries, it is likely that something external to the system boundary has affected or initiated the course of events. To an investigator, this is a good place to begin looking for possible human intervention.</p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>