<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 8:Reading List</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="toc" role="doc-toc">
<header>
<p class="topline"></p>
<h2 class="chaptername01"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_173" aria-label=" Page 173. "/>Reading List</h2>
<p class="number02">8</p>
<p class="underline"></p>
<p class="doi">DOI:10-9781420095806-8</p>
<p class="intro">Nihil novi sub sole.<span class="block"/>(There is nothing new under the sun.)</p>
<p class="intro1"></p>
<p class="underline06">Ecclesiastes, Old Testament</p>
</header>
<section aria-labelledby="sec8_1">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec8_1">Books and Monographs</h2>
<blockquote>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Forensic Science: An Introduction to Scientific and Investigative Techniques</i>, edited by Stuart James and Jon Nordby, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2004, 689 pp. Besides being an excellent forensic science survey textbook, and a mystery writer&#x2019;s desk reference, a short but excellent description of the scientific method is on pp. 8 and 9. In this regard, please pause and well consider footnotes 7 and 10 on p. 10.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Guidelines for Failure Investigation,</i> Task Committee on Guidelines for Failure Investigation, ASCE Press, NY, 1989, 221 pp. While the examples in this guide are from civil engineering, the principles and methodology are excellent. It is succinct and full of helpful advice, especially for inexperienced investigators.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Incident Investigation and Reporting</i>, A. Beare and S. Lutterodt, Electric Power Research Institute 1002077, May 2003, about 80 pp. This monograph describes a model procedure for investigating incidents. The model was prepared by surveying the procedures used at fourteen utilities that were believed to have effective root cause programs. Other sources were also included in the model. A good primer on event cause graphing is provided in Appendix C.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The Fundamentals of Forensic Investigation Procedure Guidebook, </i>J. Reynolds, H. Manger, and R. Samm, Electric Power Research Institute 1001890, March 2003, about 55 pp. While intended for use in investigating switchyard and power utility distribution failures, the principles are easily transferred to other applications. It is intended to be a training manual to introduce methodical forensic investigation methods to utility personnel and covers fault tree analysis, witness interview, data gathering, and reports, and also provides a case study. Several useful checklists are included.</p>
<p class="noindent8"></p>
<p class="noindent8"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_174" aria-label=" Page 174."/><i>National Transportation Safety Board Aviation Investigation Manual</i>&#x2014;   <i>Major Teams Investigations,</i> November 2002, 53 pp. This is the procedure and administrative manual used by the NTSB that explains how investigative teams investigate major incidents. Such a team might have a hundred members and several governmental agencies.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>NPFA 921: Fire and Explosion Investigations,</i> National Fire Protection Association, 1992 ed., 120 pp. As its name indicates, this is a brief but useful handbook on how to conduct the investigation of a fire or explosion. Chapter 2 has a good discussion of using the scientific method to determine the cause of a fire or explosion.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>NPFA 907M: Determination of Electrical Fire Causes,</i> National Fire Protection Association, 1988 ed., 40 pp. This is a companion to NPFA 921 and is focused on fires caused by electrical faults and failures. Part I is a good overview on how to conduct an investigation, and Chapter 8 in Part II, while specific for electrical fires, provides a good outline of what is expected of an investigator.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Event and Causal Factors Analysis,</i> J. Buys and J. Clark, Technical Research and Analysis Center, SCIENTECH, Inc., SCIE-D0E-01- TRAC-14&#x2013;95, August 1995, 13 pp. This monograph contains a brief description of the event and causal factors analysis charting method.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Fault Tree Handbook,</i> W. E. Vesely, F. F. Goldberg, N. H. Roberts, and D. F. Haasl, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, NUREG-0492, January 1981, 209 pp. This publication is essentially an entire course in fault tree analysis theory and application. Chapter VII has a nice explanation of Boolean algebra and how it can be applied to fault trees. This publication can be downloaded from the Internet free of charge in PDF format.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Machinery Failure Analysis and Troubleshooting,</i> 3rd ed., Vol. 2 of the <i>Practical Machinery Management for Process Plants</i> series, Heinz Bloch and Fred Geitner, Gulf Publishing, Houston, TX, 1997, 667 pp. Chapters 10 through 13 and Appendixes A and B are especially germane to failure analysis work as discussed in this book, although the entire book is certainly worth the time to read, as it is written to be practical and immediately usable. The seven-cause category approach introduced in Chapter 10 is a good method to apply when a person is otherwise inexperienced in conducting root cause investigations and the failure involves equipment or systems of equipment.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The Human Performance Evaluation Process: A Resource for Reviewing the Identification and Resolution of Human Performance Problems, </i>Valerie Barnes and Brian Haagensen, 0ffice of Nuclear Regulatory Research, NUREG/CR-6751, September 2001, about 125 pp. As the title states, it is a good text that describes how human performance issues are sorted out. Be sure to check out Chapter 7, especially <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_175" aria-label=" Page 175."/>Figure 7.1, the HPEP cause tree. It is a useful method for quickly sorting out the type of human performance problem that may be involved in a failure.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Crime Scene Investigation: A Guide for Law Enforcement, Research Report,</i> U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, NCJ 178280, January 2000, 47 pp. This is a good overview of the recommended practices for preserving crime scene evidence and conducting preliminary investigative work at the crime scene.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Fire and Arson Scene Evidence: A Guide for Public Safety Personnel, Research Report,</i> U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, NCJ 181584, June 2000, 66 pp. This publication, much of which was developed at the University of Central Florida, is an attempt at establishing a protocol for gathering evidence at the scene of a fire.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>A Guide for Explosion and Bombing Scene Investigation, Research Report, </i>U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, NCJ181869, June 2000, 51 pp. As with its sister publication, the University of Central Florida also contributed substantially to this one. This is also an attempt at establishing a protocol for gathering evidence at the scene of an explosion or bombing.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Root Cause Analysis, Good Practice</i>, Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, 0E-907, INPO 90&#x2013;004, January 1990, 74 pp. This root cause how-to manual was developed from surveying a number of nuclear power utilities. The document consists of key principles and examples of methods. The term <i>root cause</i> is defined in this document as &#x201C;the fundamental cause(s) that, if corrected, will prevent recurrence of an event or adverse condition.&#x201D; </p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Assessment of Accident Investigation Methods,</i> Steve Munson, MS thesis, University of Montana, 1999, 49 pp. The thesis is based upon a case study of wild land fire fighting and how three investigative methods were applied. Two methods were found to be successful: sequential timing and events process (STEP) and fault tree analysis. The third method, controls/barriers analysis, was found to be not applicable to the case study that involved wild land firefighter entrapments. Within the thesis is an excellent comparison of the various investigative methods, including MORT, noting their strong points and weak points. Mr. Munson did a fine job.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Procedures for Performing a Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis (FMECA),</i> MIL-STD-1629A, November 24, 1980. This is the formal procedure used by all departments and agencies of the U.S. Department of Defense. As with many military publications, this one can be hard to follow at first if the reader has not previously been exposed to military procurement jargon. The document lays out the <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_176" aria-label=" Page 176."/>military method of determining potential failure modes in a system and the resulting consequences. If used in reverse, the method can be useful in diagnosing failures in systems.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Guidelines for the Naval Aviation Reliability-Centered Maintenance Process,</i> NAVAIR 00&#x2013;25-403, March 1, 2003. RCM is the acronym for reliability-centered maintenance. This is an analytic process to determine preventive maintenance requirements. The methodology is used to prevent failures from occurring by considering how failures might occur and what to do to prevent them from occurring. The heart of this method is FMECA, failure modes, effects, and criticality analysis. This differs from a basic FMEA, failure modes and effects analysis, in that it also considers the consequences of the failure.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>On Man in the Universe</i>, Introduction by Louside Loomis, Walter Black, Inc., Roslyn, NY, 1943. There is a brief but good discussion of Aristotle&#x2019;s method of inductive logic on p. xiv.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Reason and Responsibility</i>, edited by Joel Feinburg, Dickenson Publishing, Encino, CA, 1971. The <i>a priori</i> method of reasoning is discussed at length in the essay authored by A. J. Ayer, &#x201C;The A Priori,&#x201D;  beginning on p. 181.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The Columbia History of the World,</i> edited by J. A. Garraty and P. Gay, Harper and Row, NY, 1981. Pages 681&#x2013;686 discuss Aristotle&#x2019;s inductive method.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>General Chemistry</i>, Linus Pauling, Dover Publications, NY, 1970. Pages 13&#x2013;15 discuss the modern scientific method as espoused by Dr. Pauling, a Nobel Prize laureate.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The Engineering Handbook,</i> edited by Richard Dorf, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1995. Pages 1897&#x2013;1906 discuss briefly several systematic approaches to failure and hazard analysis.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>To Engineer Is Human</i>, Henry Petroski, Vintage Books, 1992, 251 pp. This book is about failure with respect to engineering design and has an excellent chapter about forensic engineering (Chapter 14). I highly recommend this book for its insights into the workings of engineering failure. It is also very readable.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Bones,</i> Douglas H. Ubelaker and Henry Scammell, Harper Collins, NY, 1992, 317 pp. This is a casebook of a forensic anthropologist. The book is not only informative, but also interesting to read. Dr. Ubelaker reconstructs who a person was from his remains by applying what has been already learned in physical anthropology and medical science and then working backwards.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The Seashell on the Mountaintop,</i> Alan Cutler, Plume Books (Penguin Group), NY, 2003, 228 pp. Interesting by itself as a biography of one of the post-Galilean Renaissance scientists in the seventeenth century, Nicolaus Steno, it is an absorbing story of a person tenaciously <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_177" aria-label=" Page 177."/>applying the scientific method to explain one problem, why seashells are found on mountaintops, and by doing so inventing a new science, geology. This is an excellent book that exemplifies the conflicts of a worldview based upon deductive reasoning and religious dogma versus a worldview based on inductive reasoning and accepting evidence at face value.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Managingthe Risks of Organizational Accidents,</i> James Reason, Ashgate Publishing, Burlington, VT, 1997, 252 pp. This book assesses how failures occur in organizations, especially how to detect organizational and process weaknesses. I recommend it to managers of power plants, manufacturing facilities, hotels, hospitals, ships, and other organizations that have the potential to cause harm to the public. It has some excellent recommendations about how to avoid organizational failure.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Galileo&#x2019;s Revenge,</i> Peter Huber, Basic Books, NY, 1991. This book discusses the apparent proliferation of &#x201C;junk science&#x201D;  testimony in the court room in many high-profile cases.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The New Rational Manager,</i> Charles Kepner and Benjamin Tregoe, reissued by Princeton Research Press, Princeton, NJ, 1981, 224 pp. This is the text upon which the K-T method is based.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Forensic Engineering,</i> edited by Kenneth Carper, Elsevier, NY, 1989, 353 pp. This is an introductory text that explains and defines forensic engineering. There are fourteen chapters, each written by a different author, which describe some facet of forensic engineering. Chapter 3, authored by Paul E. Pritzer, PE, is about forensic engineering with respect to fires and discusses briefly the investigative team concept. I also recommend Chapter 10 (photo documentation), Chapter 11 (reports), and Chapter 12 (expert witness).</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Root Cause Analysis Guidance Document,</i> U.S. Department of Energy, DOE-NE-STD-1004&#x2013;92, February 1992, about 30 pp. As the name implies, this document outlines the basic steps used by the Department of Energy in conducting a root cause assessment. In Table 1 is a handy comparison of the strengths and weaknesses of various investigative methods.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Root Cause Analysis: Improving Performance for Bottom-Line Results, </i>Robert Latino and Kenneth Latino, 3rd ed., CRC Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 2006, 266 pp. This book about root cause is aimed at persons in management. It discusses at length how to initiate and maintain a root cause program in a large organization to reduce internal costs. However, the lessons concerning the management of a root cause organization can also be applied to most organizations that regularly perform scientific investigations of failure events or crimes.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_178" aria-label=" Page 178."/><i>Introduction to Mathematical Statistics,</i> Paul Hoel, John Wiley &amp; Sons, NY, 1971. Pages 190&#x2013;224 discuss general principles for statistical inference, one of the methodologies employed in modern inductive reasoning.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Reporting Technical Information,</i> Houp and Pearsall, Glencoe Press, Beverly Hills, CA, 1968. With respect to the topics discussed, pp. 224&#x2013;225 provide a format used for the reporting of physical research findings. Pages 47&#x2013;56 provide an excellent discussion of audience analysis, and pp. 57&#x2013;68 provide useful information for the organization of findings and observations. Overall, this text provides an excellent foundation for technical writing.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The Elements of Style,</i> by Strunk and White, 4th ed., Longman Publishers, NY, 2000, 105 pp. As one reviewer said of this book, &#x201C;It&#x2019;s hard to imagine an engineer or a manager who doesn&#x2019;t need to express himself in English prose as part of his job.&#x201D;  Chapter V, &#x201C;An Approach to Style,&#x201D;  beginning on p. 66, provides a short list of writing style reminders that certainly apply to reporting the findings of a failure investigation.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Murders in the Rue Morgue,</i> Edgar Allen Poe, 1841. There are several editions extant. Several are even available free of charge on the Internet. This is an interesting novella, as it is considered the first modern detective story. What is interesting with respect to failure analysis is that in the first two pages there is an excellent exposition of how to conduct an impartial, fact-based failure investigation. The novella then gives an example of a case that would challenge normal investigation methods, and then concludes by explaining how the method was used to solve this otherwise inexplicable case.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Fingerprints,</i> Colin Beavan, Hyperion, NY, 2001, 232 pp. Excellent nonfiction book that provides a history of fingerprints and information about fingerprints and fingerprinting, and tells the interesting case story that introduced fingerprinting as a <i>bona fide</i> forensic technique.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Inviting Disaster: Lessons from the Edge of Technology,</i> James R. Chiles, Harper Business, NY, 2002, 338 pp. Well-written narrative stories about how some relatively recent disasters happened. Some of the events include Chernobyl, Bhopal, the space shuttles, the World Trade Center, the crash of the Concorde, and the <i>Thresher.</i> Having them succinctly packaged in one book is very useful, especially for classroom discussion of common factors.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Vidocq: A Biography,</i> John Philip Stead, Ray Publishers, NY, 1954. Vidocq wrote his memoirs in four volumes, which are entitled <i>Memoires de Vidocq, Chef de Police de Surete Jusqu&#x2019;en 1827.</i> However, since it is well recognized that these memoirs were likely all or largely ghost written <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_179" aria-label=" Page 179."/>and generously exaggerated, and that Vidocq only authorized the first two volumes, I recommend Mr. Stead&#x2019;s book instead for a more objective perspective about Vidocq&#x2019;s life. A 1946 United Artists English language motion picture about Vidocq was made starring George Sanders and Carole Landis, entitled <i>A Scandal in Paris.</i> It is also distributed under the title <i>Thieves Holiday.</i> The movie is more of a comedy and a slightly naughty (for the 1940s) bedroom farce than a genuine depiction of Vidocq. A more recent French language motion picture in 2001 starred Gerard Depardieu as the intrepid detective. It was not well received by the French critics.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The Dream of Reason,</i> Anthony Gottlieb, W. W. Norton, NY, January 2001, 352 pp. The book is a history of philosophy from ancient Greece to the Renaissance. A large portion of the book, however, is devoted to logic, especially the deductive and inductive methods. The chapters that involve the development of the scientific method, William of Occam, and Francis Bacon are especially germane.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Roots of Scientific Thought,</i> Philip P. Wiener and Aaron Noland, Basic Books, NY, 1957, 677 pp. This is an excellent survey of what has constituted scientific thinking and evidence at various times in the history of Western civilization. It is especially notable in showing how social developments have interacted with scientific thinking and vice versa. While the articles are written in an academic style that can sometimes be difficult, the content is excellent.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>How We Know What Isn&#x2019;t So,</i> Thomas Gilovich, Free Press, NY, 1991, 216 pp. This is a readable discussion of why people believe irrational things and the nature of bias in the interpretation of data.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Failure Mode and Effect Analysis,</i> 2nd ed., D. H. Stamatis, ASQ Quality Press, Milwaukee, WI, 2003, 455 pp. plus CD supplement. This college text explains well the how-to mechanics of creating FMEA models for a wide variety of industries.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>The Basics of FMEA,</i> McDermott, Mikulak, and Beauregard, Productivity Press, Florence, KY, 1996, 75 pp. While this small handbook does not offer the breadth of industry examples as the text by Stamatis, it does provide an easy-to-read explanation of how FMEA works and what to do to create one.</p>
<p class="noindent8"><i>Columbia</i> Accident Investigation Board, Report Vol. 1, August 2003, available at http://caib.nasa.gov/news/report/volume1/default.html. This is a sizable download for all the volumes. A readable overview is contained in Vol. 1, which will download in a PDF format at about 11 MB, or also in smaller sections. It is also available in a paper version with a CD-ROM through the U.S. Government Printing Office, NASA, and the National Technical Information Service. This is possibly the most thorough and detailed analysis of a major failure <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_180" aria-label=" Page 180."/>event readily available to the public. It is a classic study of how even a multilayered barrier scheme put together by the best and brightest can be circumvented by a latently flawed decision-making process. This should be required reading by all senior managers in industries that hold the public trust, such as the nuclear industry, the defense industry, and the chemical industry. Unfortunately, it is not.</p>
</blockquote>
</section>
<section aria-labelledby="sec8_2">
<h2 class="chsubhead" id="sec8_2">Papers and Articles</h2>
<blockquote>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;Trial and Error,&#x201D;  Harry Saunders and Joshua Genser, <i>The Sciences, </i>September/October 1999, Vol. 39, No. 5, pp. 18&#x2013;23, published by the New York Academy of Sciences. This is an interesting short article about defining <i>reasonable doubt</i> in terms of decision theory and uncertainty. The authors discuss how the vagueness of the legal term <i>reasonable doubt</i> can lead juries to different verdicts despite the fact that they hold similar beliefs concerning the defendant&#x2019;s guilt.</p>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;When Is Seeing Believing?&#x201D;  William Mitchell, <i>Scientific American, </i>February 1994, Vol. 270, No. 2, pp. 68&#x2013;75. This is recommended reading for all persons involved in the presentation and examination of evidence. The article describes some of the ways in which computer graphics can be used to provide fake photographic evidence. Unfortunately, one of the darker sides of the computer revolution is that photographic evidence, once considered quite reliable, is now becoming increasingly easier to fake. It will not be long until unscrupulous forensic experts use computerized faking techniques to persuade juries as to the &#x201C;scientific&#x201D;  evidence in a case, especially when the monetary stakes are sufficiently high.</p>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;Chemist in the Courtroom,&#x201D;  Robert Athey, Jr., <i>American Scientist, </i>September-October 1999, Vol. 87, No. 5, pp. 390&#x2013;391, published by Sigma Xi. This is a short article describing a forensic chemist&#x2019;s experiences as an expert witness.</p>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;Register or Perish,&#x201D;  Marina Krakowsky, <i>Scientific American,</i> December 2004, pp. 18&#x2013;19. The article discusses the publication bias in medical journals, wherein research that reports positive information about a drug is published, but research that finds negative information or neutral information about a drug is not published.</p>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;Improve Your Root Cause Analysis,&#x201D;  Duke Okes, CMC, <i>Manufacturing Engineering,</i> March 2005, pp. 171&#x2013;178. The article outlines the general method of root cause analysis used in the manufacturing industry and provides some useful tips. An excellent point made early in the paper is &#x201C;root cause analysis is not the same as problem solving. Root cause analysis is only the diagnostic part of the problem solving <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page_181" aria-label=" Page 181."/>process, but it&#x2019;s the part that if done incorrectly, causes all subsequent actions to have little value.&#x201D; </p>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;Punishing People or Learning from Failure? The Choice Is Ours,&#x201D;  Sidney Dekker, Centre for Human Factors in Aviation, IKP, Linkoping Institute of Technology, Sweden, at http://www.hufag.nl. Excellent paper describing the tendency to punish people who make errors that lead to failures rather than understanding the context of why the error was made and correcting it.</p>
<p class="noindent8">Title 10, Courts and Judicial Procedure, Part III, Procedure, Chapter 43, Evidence and Witnesses, Subchapter III, Chain of Custody:<a href="http://delcode.delaware.gov/title10/c043/sc03/index.shtml.">http://delcode.delaware.gov/title10/c043/sc03/index.shtml.</a> These are the legal requirements in the state of Delaware with respect to chain of custody.</p>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;Believe It or Not: The Battle over Certainty, A Point ofView,&#x201D;  Lisa Jardine, BBC News, April 28, 2006, published on the BBC News website, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/magazine/4950876.stm. This is the source of the story used in Chapter 2 about the pendulum clock and the doubts of Mr. Christiaan Huygens, the inventor of the clocks, about their reported accuracy.</p>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;How to Investigate a Process Interruption,&#x201D;  Raymond Atkins, CPMM, <i>Maintenance Technology Magazine,</i> January 2008, pp. 44&#x2013;47. There is also a magazine website, http://www.mt-online.com/, on which the article has been archived. This is a succinct explanation of how to investigate problems associated with a process interruption. There is a short section noting the similarity of conducting a root cause failure analysis (RCFA) and a failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) on p. 47. The succinct advice on p. 46 concerning reviewing PM (preventative maintenance) and PdM (predictive maintenance) work orders and also comparing the performance of the offending machine with another, a variant of change analysis, is excellent. These items are often overlooked.</p>
<p class="noindent8">&#x201C;Forget about Causes, Focus on Solutions,&#x201D;  Fred Nichols, 2004, available at <a href="http://home.att.net/~OPSINC/forget_about_causes.pdf."> http://home.att.net/~OPSINC/forget_about_causes.pdf.</a> This is a short paper that discusses the history of the gap theory, which is one of the fundamental principles applied in the K-T method. Mr. Nichols makes the point in this paper that often there is little that can be done concerning the causes of problems and that sometimes the only practical thing to do is focus on solutions.</p>
</blockquote>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>